BLACK LIVES MATTER was born after a bad night at a bar. It was July 2013 and Alicia Garza, a writer and organiser based in Oakland, was out with her husband and friends. Nobody was having a great time and they checked their phones often, wanting to see if the jury had returned a verdict in the trial of the neighbourhood-watch volunteer who had shot and killed Trayvon Martin, a 17-year-old African-American boy carrying only a bag of Skittles. When the news came in—not guilty—Ms Garza went home angry and heartsore, fired up Facebook and wrote a post that ended with the words “our lives matter”. The movement coalesced quickly, and it did so around that sentiment. #BlackLivesMatter, the hashtag many had used to share Ms Garza’s post, lent the group its name. The words, in heavy block script, became an emblem; chanted, they were a rallying cry. In the current protests, triggered by the killing of George Floyd in Minneapolis on May 25th, those chants and those words are much in evidence. They are often accompanied by a simple black-and-white image of a raised fist, spray-painted onto placards, T-shirts and buildings. Protests are rife with symbolism. The febrile creativity of a crowd united in anger helps imbue objects and images with meaning. Physically showing up is a powerful statement all on its own, for photographs of vast crowds filling public spaces are an indication of wider opinion. (This helps explain the fuss Donald Trump made over the official photographs of his inauguration versus that of Barack Obama, his predecessor; nearly four years on, it is clear that the size of his crowds still matters to the president.) The sight of protests can be leveraged to effect political change by persuading lawmakers of the strength of public sentiment. Unifying colours, such as the green, purple and white worn by British suffragettes, or insignia, such as “pussy hats”, can amplify the effect; but even in initially less well-organised or unified protests, symbols can emerge. Sometimes this happens spontaneously. Umbrellas and gas masks help guard wearers against the use of pepper spray, tear-gas and other methods of crowd dispersal and went on to become potent symbols of protest in Hong Kong and Turkey respectively. Face coverings can do double or even triple duty: protecting against noxious substances and preventing easy identification by authorities while showing support for a cause. Supporters of Pussy Riot, a punk collective, often wear brightly coloured balaclavas. The grinning Guy Fawkes masks designed by David Lloyd, a British comic-book artist, for the “V for Vendetta” series (later made into a film), have also been adopted by groups around the world, notably the Occupy movement and Anonymous, a “hacktivist collective”. In this case, the mask recalls not only the graphic novel—about a charismatic leader resisting a fascist state—but also Fawkes himself. The threat is implicit. Such symbols are often slippery, though. Meanings can shift with the aims of a group or faction or simply be re-interpreted over time. In revolutionary France, the Marquis de Lafayette, the same French aristocrat who fought in the American revolutionary war, is said to have designed the red, blue and white cockade. These tokens (often pinned to a bonnet rouge) helped identify those sympathetic to the revolutionary cause. Usually simply made from wool, rather than the more expensive silk, they were also a kind of summation of the cause’s ideals, expressing contempt for fussy and expensive aristocratic fashions. Later, the tricolour seeped out from the cockade into the broader political sphere and is now immortalised in the French flag, a symbol of national identity and unity. The raised fist has found favour with generations of protesters. It recalls the Black Power movement of the 1960s and the famous photograph of Tommie Smith and John Carlos, two African-American athletes, receiving Olympic medals with heads bowed and gloved fists held aloft. The Industrial Workers of the World used it before and during the first world war; in Spain, it became a salute given by Republicans during the civil war (1936-39). Nadezhda Tolokonnikova, a member of Pussy Riot, was photographed during her trial wearing a T-shirt bearing a raised fist below the legend “¡No Pasaran!” (“They shall not pass!”), a defiant protest slogan with a long and varied history. All this is proof, if it were needed, that while some icons are ephemeral or weaken over time, others endure, even if the causes they are attached to are forgotten. It is difficult to know what people will make of pussy hats a century from now, but it is likely that the raised fist will continue to pack a punch.