LIKE OTHER non-essential businesses, recording studios around the world have gone quiet during the pandemic. “This place is normally just buzzing with music out of every room,” says Viv Broughton, the owner of The Premises, a studio in Hackney, London, which since 1986 has worked with artists as varied as Nina Simone and the Arctic Monkeys. “To hear it silent and empty is horrible,” he says. Many musicians will be eager to return to these spaces—not to mention live-music venues—and fill them with noise once again. In the meantime, they too are working from home. On April 24th Kali Uchis, an American singer-songwriter, released “To Feel Alive”, a four-track EP which was recorded in a makeshift studio in her bedroom. On May 15th Charli XCX, a British pop star, released “How I’m Feeling Now”, an album written and recorded in lockdown at her home in Los Angeles. She consulted her fans on the lyrics and shot videos in front of a green screen in her basement. For some musicians, the pandemic has presented an opportunity to hone their craft. In April Rolling Stone reported a 55% increase in Google search traffic for GarageBand, a piece of music-creation software; Apple, which owns GarageBand, said that there had been 13m downloads of sound effects from the programme’s library since the beginning of February. Manufacturers and retailers of musical instruments say that business is booming; Music Radar, a website, has observed an uptick in interest in its product guides. “There’s been an awakening in terms of people really going for their aspirations,” says Patrick Osei, a musician and producer who runs Hot Money Studios in Bermondsey, London. He has adapted his services in lockdown, offering consultations via Zoom for musicians setting up home studios and even mixing tracks for clients who have recorded music on their iPhones. It is a trend that may persist. Professional studio sessions are often prohibitively expensive for new or unsigned artists. According to Recording Connection, an industry website, studio fees can be between $30 and $200 per hour; an album takes between 60 and 100 hours to produce “depending on the artists’ skill level”. High-quality home-recording equipment, by contrast, can be purchased at a lower cost and sustain musicians for a long time. In 2019 revenues from sales of home-studio products (including microphones, audio interfaces, mixers, studio monitor speakers and headphones) exceeded $700m according to FutureSource, a consultancy. “Even over the last 10 years, technology has continued to progress and prices have continued to fall to record levels,” James Kirby of FutureSource says. “In the current climate an aspiring content creator could pick-up a high-quality USB microphone for $100 or an audio interface and XLR microphone for around $200, and start recording straight away using a good standard of freely available software.” Mr Kirby points out that “even chart-topping tracks” are produced at home; Billie Eilish’s Grammy award-winning debut album, “When We All Fall Asleep, Where Do We Go?”, was produced by her brother, Finneas O’Connell, in his bedroom. One website shows how to recreate his home studio for “less than $3,000”. As it happens, much of the technology in recording studios was originally intended for domestic use. When Thomas Edison designed the phonograph to record and playback voice recordings, he envisaged one “in every home”; in 1878 he listed “reproduction of music” as one of its possible future uses. The gadget evolved to become the graphophone, designed by Alexander Graham Bell, which was later replaced by Emile Berliner’s gramophone. The development of magnetic recording during the second world war made possible the editing and layering of tracks; the release of Tascam’s PortaStudio, a multitrack recorder, in the late 1970s made decent home-recording equipment available to the consumer market. By the 1990s, as personal computers became more common, Microsoft Windows software made it possible to mix and distribute music online. Many of the most famous studios are former homes, too. The Memphis Recording Service—now known as Sun Studio—was opened in 1950 in a converted car garage in Tennessee; it was where Elvis Presley recorded some of his early hits. In the 1970s a ranch house in Malibu was transformed into a live-in studio known as Shangri-La. Bob Dylan and Adele have been among its famous guests. Yet music professionals insist the point of recording studios is not comfort or intimacy: for artists, recording in a studio offers cachet. It is a sign that their career is progressing and attracting investment. With expert sound engineers and top-of-the-range equipment on hand, all an artist needs to think about is delivering “the greatest performance they can”, Mr Broughton says. “You can’t replicate that in your bedroom in your pyjamas sitting in front of a screen. It’s just not the same.” Mr Broughton, who plans to reopen his studio in July, is optimistic about the future. The Premises “have always been phenomenally busy, we almost never close, and I think we’ll get back to that pretty quickly,” he reckons. He is currently investing in high-definition film equipment to broadcast and monetise live studio sessions. Mr Osei is also confident that he will have plenty of business when Hot Money Studios can reopen. He has face-masks emblazoned with his company’s logo ready for when that day comes.