SINCE GEORGE FLOYD, an African-American man, was choked to death by a policeman in Minneapolis on May 25th, protests have erupted in more than 350 cities nationwide. Many have drawn parallels with 1968, when anger at racial injustice similarly consumed the streets. (They include the president, who hopes to benefit electorally, as Richard Nixon did.) But since that year the cycle of injustice, protest, riot and reaction has come around many times. Though segregation and black poverty have declined, wide disparities remain in income, wealth, health and jobs—and before the law. American policing is both complex, with more than 18,000 mostly small, local forces, and dangerous. But cops kill about 1,000 people a year, and African-American citizens are three times more likely than whites to die. For young black men, being killed by police is the sixth-commonest cause of death. But reform is possible; the police department in Camden, New Jersey, is one that has made itself less confrontational and more accountable. Covid-19 threatens to widen America’s inequalities: African-Americans have been far likelier than whites to die of it; the poor have been likelier to lose their jobs. The disease is also making more egalitarian Europe less equal. The covid recession has hit badly paid workers harder than the better-off, and exposed gaps in the continent’s welfare systems. Spain, which had no income-support system for the country’s many informal workers, is now introducing a minimum-income scheme. In Italy, where the informal sector makes up perhaps 14% of the economy, casual workers are falling back on charity. On both sides of the Atlantic, the recession, unlike most downturns, is also worsening inequality between the sexes. In rich countries, the wave of coronavirus infections seems to be receding. But it is gathering pace in many poor ones, which now account for three-quarters of the 100,000 cases counted worldwide each day. Many more are going unreported. Testing is scarcer in poor countries; and autocratic governments (more common in the developing world) are likelier than democracies to fib about figures. In Yemen, ravaged by a five-year war—and, since 2016, by cholera—authorities cannot count the cases even where they are willing to do so. No one believes the official death toll of just 95. In South Asia, where lockdowns have largely been lifted, reported infections are rising sharply; the true figures could be far worse. The world’s third-biggest international financial centre has become a geopolitical flashpoint. China is imposing a national-security law on Hong Kong; America has threatened to downgrade the territory’s legal privileges, which treat it as autonomous from China. The territory has defied pessimists before. But now three tests will help investors to judge whether this financial conduit between China and the rest of the world will remain open: how China implements the security law; whether America takes aim at the territory’s dollar-payments system; and whether the Chinese Communist Party attempts not just to silence critics but to compromise Hong Kong’s institutions, including its courts, central bank and regulators. At 3.22pm on May 30th a Falcon 9 rocket lifted off from Cape Canaveral in Florida. Nineteen hours later the Crew Dragon capsule duly delivered Robert Behnken and Douglas Hurley to the International Space Station. The Dragon is America’s first crewed spacecraft since the space shuttle was retired in 2011. It is also the first crewed craft from any country designed and operated by a private company—Elon Musk’s SpaceX—to reach orbit. What is more, it is remarkably cheap by NASA’s past standards, costing taxpayers just $1.7bn, according to the Planetary Society. So far, all human space flight has been governmental. It doesn’t have to be: SpaceX has already signed deals with companies for trips to the space station and into Earth orbit, and for a future craft to take a Japanese businessman around the Moon.