MORE THAN 40 feet off the ground and weighing 12 tonnes, the colossal bronze statue of Robert E. Lee astride his horse that has stood on Monument Avenue in Richmond, Virginia, for 130 years was too high and heavy for protesters to topple. Instead they covered the stone base beneath the Confederacy’s leading general with graffiti: “Black Lives Matter”; “Down with hate”; “Uplift!” More evocative than an empty plinth, the site has become a place for activists and locals to gather. Three weeks after the killing of George Floyd by a white police officer sparked widespread protests, Confederate statues are being defaced and torn down across America. The process is particularly striking in Richmond, capital of the Confederacy during the civil war. Monument Avenue once epitomised racism: in the early 20th century, estate agents marketed its elegant houses as whites-only through advertisements illustrated with the statues of the Confederate leaders that dot it. Though such statues commemorate the rebel army that fought in the civil war to preserve states’ rights to keep slaves, most were erected later, during the Jim Crow era of the late 19th and early 20th centuries. Under the laws of that time, blacks in the South were forced to attend different schools. They risked lynching if they tried to register to vote and were excluded from all but low-paying jobs. Confederate statues, which sentimentalise and glorify the “lost cause” of the civil war, were put up to bolster all that. Some went up even more recently, during the civil-rights struggle of the 1960s. Their continued presence in America’s cities and towns, painful and insulting for so many, has been the subject of often ponderous debate. Two years ago a commission in Richmond published its recommendations on what should be done with Monument Avenue’s five Confederate statues. Its proposals—to remove that of Jefferson Davis, the president of the Confederacy, and put explanatory signs on the others—mirrored what protesters did within hours last week: toppling Davis and covering the rest in slogans. This fits into a familiar pattern in which racist murders are followed by a flurry of statue removal. After a gunman who was fond of posing with the Confederate flag killed nine African-Americans at a church in Charleston, South Carolina, in 2015, more than 100 Confederate monuments across America were taken down over the next three years. Several dozen more were removed two years later, after a white supremacist protesting against the planned removal of a statue of Lee in Charlottesville, Virginia, killed a young woman by driving a car into a crowd of counter-protesters. The Southern Poverty Law Centre, which monitors far-right extremists, reckons that more than 700 Confederate statues and roughly the same number of other such symbols, from flags to road names and schools, remain in public places. But it seems likely that the current protests, unprecedented in their scale and, especially, in the number of white Americans who have taken part, will herald the biggest wave of removals yet. “Activists have done a really great job of educating people about the meaning of these symbols,” says Adam Domby, author of “The False Cause: Fraud, Fabrication and White Supremacy in Confederate Memory”, a book published this year. The shift in public opinion this suggests is evident in the response of businesses and political leaders. Last week NASCAR, a car-racing tournament popular in the South, banned the rebel flag, which has long fluttered at its races. The navy and the marine corps, as well as the army’s forces in South Korea, said they were banning Confederate symbols from their public spaces. The Republican-led Senate Armed Services Committee, meanwhile, voted to relabel ten army bases in southern states named after Confederate generals. President Donald Trump defended the manifestly unpatriotic practice of calling military bases after vanquished rebels, tweeting that he would not countenance renaming “these Magnificent and Fabled Military Installations”. That tweet is indicative of Confederate symbols’ enduring allure for a minority of Americans. This quickly became evident in Richmond last week. After Virginia’s Democratic governor had promised the state would remove the statue of Lee, a judge temporarily blocked it from doing so, citing a deed from 1890 that required Virginia to keep the statue and the site “perpetually sacred” and to “affectionately protect it”. Statues are also protected by modern-day Republican lawmakers. One of the reasons so many still stand is that at least half a dozen Southern states have passed laws banning or impeding their removal. The most recent is Alabama, which in 2017 passed legislation making it difficult to remove statues that had stood for more than 40 years. But ways are being found around such laws. Last week, after protesters tried and failed to tear down a 50-foot Confederate obelisk in Birmingham, the mayor ordered city workers to do so. He was promptly sued by Alabama’s attorney-general but is expected to claim that the statue was removed in the interest of public safety. What should be done with such statues once it has been decided they must go? Julian Hayter, a professor of history at the University of Richmond and a member of the committee that studied the fate of Monument Avenue’s bronzes, thinks it would be a “wasted opportunity” not to use them to teach Americans about the lasting effects of the Jim Crow era, perhaps by putting them in a museum or less prestigious public place, with signage explaining their history. Local governments might want to start making those decisions more quickly than they have tended to in the past. Earlier this month the Arkansas chapter of the Daughters of the Confederacy (established in 1894) said it would move the monument of a rebel soldier from Bentonville’s town square and put it in a private park. Even defenders of Confederate statues are beginning to realise that it might be better to place them somewhere more discreet.■