“IF IN ACT One you have a pistol hanging on the wall,” wrote Anton Chekhov, who knew a thing or two about dramatic tension, “then it must fire in the last act.” In a crucial early scene of “Irresistible”, Jon Stewart’s new film, Gary Zimmer (Steve Carell), a Democratic political consultant, is trying to convince Jack Hastings (Chris Cooper), a stolid farmer and ex-marine, to run for mayor of his small town in Wisconsin. As Mr Zimmer pleads and wheedles, a gun rack with three rifles hangs on the wall behind him. Even in his most antic roles, such as Michael Scott in the American version of “The Office” or Gru, the bald villain in the “Despicable Me” franchise, a miasma of pathos and need haunts Mr Carell’s comedy. Zimmer is an effete, hapless bozo, which lets Mr Carell put pathos and need front and centre. As Hastings, Mr Cooper makes the most of his sly, understated watchfulness; he elevates every film he appears in. Watching Mr Carell work him is like watching a poodle bark at an oak tree. Both actors make the most of this scene, which, like the film itself, is expertly acted, cleverly written, familiar and trite. The gun never goes off. “Irresistible” tells the (invented) story of Hastings’s run for mayor. Zimmer gets involved because someone filmed and posted Hastings’s impassioned speech defending immigrants at a town meeting. Zimmer, who worked on Hillary Clinton’s campaign in 2016, sees the speech, and decides that Hastings could make a good rural, white Democratic candidate. He flies to Deerlaken, Wisconsin, to convince Hastings to run for office as a Democrat. For Zimmer’s relocation, Mr Stewart hits familiar notes: small-town overfriendliness meets big-city brusqueness, the city guy’s failed attempts to be “just folks” while paying excessive attention to rental cars and in-flight catering, people new to politics making funny early mistakes. Once Zimmer and the national Democratic party jump in, so does the other side. Rose Byrne plays Faith Brewster, a cynical, effortlessly dishonest Republican consultant who worked for Donald Trump in 2016. The script implies that the two have some sort of romantic history—which allows Mr Stewart, who wrote it, to imply that political consultants, whatever views they profess for their clients, are fundamentally similar creatures. But the pairing stretches credibility. Zimmer is a hapless, smarmy, occasionally earnest dweeb; Brewster is dead-eyed and amoral. That is another way of saying that Zimmer has at least an implied backstory—viewers see his apartment in the film’s opening scene: a law-school diploma, a framed photo of Gandhi atop a Gloria Steinem book—while Brewster gets none. As money and attention pour in, the small-town mayoral race balloons, as the two parties test messaging and strategy. The consultants focus on beating each other rather than on the town’s needs (a face-off the film presents as a systemic political failure rather than as two people hired to win a contest doing their jobs). Hastings’s rival is the incumbent mayor, Jack Braun (Brett Sexton), who is equally good-natured and civic-minded. Differences in policy and outlook, critiques of past and future performance, debates, arguments among supporters: none of these ordinary features of democratic politics ever arise. Instead, Zimmer and Brewster bloody up the other’s candidate in a series of increasingly outlandish campaign ads (all paid for by opaque organisations with believably anodyne names involving faith, freedom and family). Hastings spends a lot of time asking a lot of strangers for money, even attending a fundraiser in New York populated by extras from an old Woody Allen movie who quote Thomas Friedman and mock Mr Trump with familiar, derisive catchphrases. There, Hastings has yet another “Mr Smith Goes to Washington” outbreak of truth-telling, which has guests reaching for their chequebooks. Mr Stewart makes a valid, unremarkable point: money distorts politics. Perhaps America would be better off with publicly financed campaigns. And he almost made an interesting movie. At one point, Zimmer tells Hastings’s daughter, Diana (Mackenzie Davis), “Sometimes good people have to do shitty things in service of the greater good.” John le Carré made a career of mining precisely that moral ambiguity; it would have been great territory to explore in the age of Mr Trump. But the film dismisses Zimmer’s statement as corrosive cynicism. But by broadening its aim, Mr Stewart’s satire loses its sharpness and becomes too familiar, even with a late plot twist. Any number of films have made the facile point that politics is vapid and silly. Aspects of it certainly are. But it is an easy leap from there to the conclusion that politics is pointless, which it is not, and that all politicians are the same, which they certainly are not. That belief put Mr Trump in the White House. If Americans vote to remove him in four months, it will be because enough of them understand that politics matters. “Irresistible” is available to rent from June 26th