WOODY ALLEN’S new film will be available to stream in Britain from June 5th—but perhaps “new-ish film” would be more accurate. “A Rainy Day in New York” was shot in the autumn of 2017 and finished in 2018, so it has taken two years for it to be picked up and distributed by Signature Entertainment, a British company. There is still no American release scheduled. Purely on the grounds of quality the long wait might be understandable: “A Rainy Day in New York” is a faint, tinny echo of Mr Allen’s early masterpieces. Yet another neurotic comedy-drama about an anxious hero (Timothée Chalamet) in a tweed jacket who adores Cole Porter and black-and-white movies, it has no discernible point except to display some of Manhattan’s swankiest apartments and most historic hotel bars. Its approval rating on Rotten Tomatoes, a review-aggregator site, is only 57%. In fact the delay has less to do with the film’s shortcomings than with the director’s reputation. Amazon signed a four-picture deal with Mr Allen in 2017 but decided against distributing “A Rainy Day in New York” the following year, claiming that his comments on the #MeToo movement’s potential “witch-hunt atmosphere” had rendered him a commercial non-starter. Mr Allen sued Amazon for breach of contract in February 2019, and the two parties settled out of court last November. Some suspected that Mr Allen’s offhand remarks were not Amazon’s main concern. A bigger factor may have been that Mr Allen’s estranged son, the journalist Ronan Farrow, had revived public interest in Dylan Farrow’s allegation that their father had sexually assaulted her. The initial allegation was made in 1992, after his break-up with Mia Farrow, Dylan and Ronan’s mother. Mr Allen denied it, arguing that it was his ex-partner’s revenge on him for having a relationship with her adopted daughter, Soon-Yi Previn. There were two official investigations, one by the Child Sexual Abuse Clinic of Yale-New Haven Hospital, and one by the New York Child Welfare Agency of the State Department of Social Services. Both concluded in 1993 that there was no evidence of sexual abuse. Another of Ms Farrow’s adopted children, Moses, would later write that his mother had coached him and his siblings to fear and loathe Mr Allen. But Dylan maintained that she had been abused, and the majority of commentators on social media accepted her version of events, and dismissed Moses’s. As Mr Allen puts it in his new autobiography, “Apropos of Nothing”, he had become “a toxic personality”. One sign of this toxicity was that “Apropos of Nothing” itself was dropped by its American publisher, Hachette, three days after its release was announced in March. This was related to the fact that Hachette also published “Catch and Kill”, Mr Farrow’s account of his investigation into the sexual abuse perpetrated by Harvey Weinstein, a film producer. Another sign was that various actors dissociated themselves from Mr Allen. Mr Chalamet announced on Instagram in January 2018 that though he couldn’t talk about the dispute, he would be donating his fee for “A Rainy Day in New York” to charity. In “Apropos of Nothing” Mr Allen alleges that Mr Chalamet “swore to my sister [who produces Mr Allen’s films] he needed to do that as he was up for an Oscar for ‘Call Me By Your Name’, and he and his agent felt he had a better chance of winning if he denounced me, so he did”. (A representative for Mr Chalamet declined to comment.) But it would be wrong to say that Mr Allen, toxic or not, was box-office poison. Another company, Arcade Publishing, released “Apropos of Nothing” on March 23rd. As well as being his most enjoyable work in a decade, the book is currently ranked as “#1 Best Seller in Individual Directors” on—yes—Amazon. On May 13th the Guardian reported that “A Rainy Day in New York” had grossed more than $330,000 in South Korea the previous weekend. At a time when so many cinemas were closed, this made it the highest-earning film in the world that week. The 84-year-old’s next project is already complete. In the mid-2000s, when Mr Allen was not bankable enough to secure American funding, he made several films in London and other European cities which were rewarded by having their names in the titles: “Vicky Cristina Barcelona”, “Midnight in Paris”, “To Rome With Love”. Now that he is out of favour in America once more, he has returned to Europe, His latest comedy, “Rifkin’s Festival”, was shot in San Sebastian with Spanish money. Whether it will ever be shown in America or Britain is another matter. Mr Allen’s own response to that question in “Apropos of Nothing” is typical: “Who knows? Who cares? Not I and certainly not audiences with plenty of other fine movies to entertain them.” But many do care. To his detractors, every new film of his is an insult; for his defenders, a victory. “A Rainy Day in New York” is available online in Britain from June 5th Picture credit: Perdido Productions / Album