GEORGE FLOYD’S death at the hands of a Minneapolis police officer on May 25th has sparked a national reckoning over police violence in America. It is a wonder it did not come sooner. Around 1,000 people are killed by the police each year, many of them black. On June 12th 27-year-old Rayshard Brooks became the latest such victim to gain national attention after he was shot twice in the back by Atlanta police in a fast-food parking lot. For young black men, this is now the sixth-commonest cause of death. But the effects of such incidents reach beyond those immediately involved. A new study suggests that killings by police officers even harm students’ performance in local high schools. The damage can last for years. To investigate the link between police violence and educational outcomes, Desmond Ang, a professor at Harvard University, combined demographic data on more than 700,000 high-school students in a south-western American city with the locations of 627 police killings in the surrounding county between 2002 and 2016. By comparing students living in the immediate vicinity of such an incident with those living slightly further away, the author is able to control for many of the variables that might influence academic performance, such as poverty and crime. Mr Ang found that students living within half a mile of a killing saw their grade-point averages (GPA) fall by an average of 0.04 points (on a four-point scale) in the semester immediately following the shooting, and by around 0.07 points in the two semesters after that. The closer they lived to an incident, the more their GPAs deteriorated, and the negative effect lasted for about three years. The youngest students—ninth-grade students, aged 14 and 15—were affected most. Youngsters in this age group who lived near the site of a police killing were about 3.5% less likely to graduate from high school and 2.5% less likely to enroll in college. It was not just the students’ academic performance that suffered; so did their mental and emotional well-being. Students who lived near to where someone had been killed by police were 15% more likely to be diagnosed with an “emotional disturbance” (ie, trouble learning, possible depression, anxiety or signs of post-traumatic stress disorder). The author found that only students of black and Hispanic backgrounds, the groups that are most likely to be killed by a cop, were affected by police killings: their GPAs fell by an average of 0.04 and 0.03 points, respectively. The academic performance and mental health of white and Asian students remained unchanged.