DEMONSTRATING CAN be a dangerous activity, even in the best of circumstances. During a pandemic, it can be lethal. When mass protests against police brutality broke out in America earlier this month, following the death of George Floyd at the hands of policemen in Minneapolis, public-health experts worried they would lead to a surge in infections. Anthony Fauci, a leading member of the White House’s coronavirus task-force, called the protests “the perfect set-up” for the spread of the virus. Eric Garcetti, the mayor of Los Angeles, warned that the gatherings could become “super-spreader events”. This was more than scaremongering. SARS-CoV-2, the virus which causes covid-19, is spread through droplets of moisture produced when an infected person speaks, coughs or sneezes. Large, crowded gatherings can contribute to the spread of the virus, especially when those involved are shouting and chanting slogans—projecting droplets farther into the air. Police tactics such as spraying tear-gas, herding protesters into contained areas and rounding up troublemakers into police vans and jail cells also increase the risk of infection. But the available evidence suggests that this month’s Black Lives Matter protests have not contributed to a surge in covid-19 cases. In a new working paper, researchers from Bentley University, the University of Colorado and San Diego State University used mobile-phone data from SafeGraph, a geolocation data firm, and covid-19 case data from the Centres for Disease Control and Prevention to determine whether the protests were associated with less social-distancing behaviour and more covid-19 cases. In fact, the opposite was true. Using data from 315 American cities with at least 100,000 people, covering the period mid-May to mid-June, the researchers compared the experience of the 281 cities where protests erupted with the 34 where they did not. One third of protesting cities saw large-scale gatherings with 1,000 or more attendees, making those particular regions more susceptible to another outbreak. Nonetheless, they found that the protests had no significant effect one way or the other on the incidence of covid-19. They also found one possible—and surprising-—reason for this. Protests were actually associated with an increase in social-distancing behaviour; for example, residents overall spent an additional 0.18 hours, or 11 minutes, per day at home (see chart). In other words, any time that residents spent protesting in the streets was more than offset by time other people spent baking bread and watching Netflix. These results could be driven by a number of factors. Those choosing not to protest might have avoided going outside because of concern for their personal safety amid increased crime and violence. That some businesses were temporarily closed because of looting made going out even less appealing. Some residents may have stayed home because of a higher perceived risk of catching the coronavirus. Finally, increased road closures and blockages may have also discouraged citizens from leaving their homes. As cases soar across the country, particularly in states such as Texas and Arizona, many Americans will be eager to point fingers. So far, the evidence suggests that protesters are not to blame.