SINCE ITS founding in 1911, the San Francisco Symphony orchestra (SFS) has had many excellent music directors, but none quite as charismatic and beloved—nor who have left as profound a mark—as Michael Tilson Thomas. “MTT”, as he is known, retires this month after a quarter-century of innovation and energy that critics say has made the SFS as synonymous with its conductor as the legendary pairings of Eugene Ormandy at the Philadelphia Orchestra or Sir Neville Marriner with the Academy of St Martin in the Fields. By the time he arrived in San Francisco in 1995, Mr Thomas, now 75, had led the London Symphony Orchestra and founded a pre-professional orchestra in Miami. Banners were hung from lampposts emblazoned with “MTT” and the face of the Los Angeles native whose grandparents led New York’s Yiddish musical-theatre scene. The buzz was palpable—and instantaneous. From his first season, Mr Thomas injected pizzazz into the programme with a focus on music by American and contemporary composers, without abandoning the standard European repertoire. An inaugural “American Festival” set the tone. Mr Thomas brought members of the Grateful Dead, a rock band, onstage to interpret the music of John Cage; in 2000 the orchestra played with Metallica, a heavy-metal group. Throughout his 25-year tenure, the longest of any American conductor, he introduced audiences to new music by contemporary composers such as John Adams, Charles Ives, Carl Ruggles and Meredith Monk. Mr Thomas has proven a maverick himself, a music director who is hip and exuberant, among the first to directly address the audience with lively introductions to the works before turning back to conduct the orchestra. His passion for musical exploration has been equally evident in the orchestra’s interpretations of the standard repertoire. Performances of works by old favourites such as Beethoven, Debussy and Tchaikovsky have been just as unexpected and vibrant. Over all these years, “no one ever walked into Davies [Symphony Hall] knowing precisely what they were about to hear,” Joshua Kosman, the longtime music critic of the San Francisco Chronicle, has said. Observers agree that Mr Thomas took an orchestra tuned to a high technical level by his predecessor, Herbert Blomstedt, and urged it toward more daring interpretive freedom and flair. Some performances of well-known works pack tremendous emotional force and appear “whipped up in that moment, just for me and my fellow listeners, like some kind of artisanal table-side meal prep,” Mr Kosman recently wrote, describing a performance of Mahler’s First Symphony at which he “inexplicably burst into tears”. Your correspondent recalls a Dvorak cello concerto in which her heart seemed to explode from her chest. What is certain is that Mr Thomas is “the complete maestro”, a rare blend of conductor, composer and educator, says Rik Malone, head of music programming at KDFC and KUSC, classical radio stations in San Francisco and Los Angeles. At heart, Mr Thomas “is a showman and a communicator, and he’s able to put those two together with a really serious and amazing musical brain—to put it across to people and make them excited to be in the concert hall.” Mr Thomas was mentored by Leonard Bernstein, and shares that great conductor’s passion for educating the general public about orchestral music. On his watch, the share of the audience aged 40 and under has risen from 11% to 28%. One of the symphony’s most admired projects is a public television series called “Keeping Score” that dives deeply into composers’ life and works, all of which is now available to stream. For 30 years, the SFS has also sponsored free musical education in the city’s public elementary schools, in which 80% of students come from ethnic minorities. Despite this outreach the orchestra, like many, remains almost exclusively white and Asian-American. Addressing that gap, at a time of heightened public awareness of racial injustice, will fall to Mr Thomas’s successor, Esa-Pekka Salonen. With programming that features a more diverse range of composers and guest conductors, the stage for San Francisco’s next leap forward is clearly set. All that remains is to send off Mr Thomas in style—as much as the coronavirus will allow. A virtual gala on June 28th, featuring many international stars, will be a fond farewell.