THERE AREN’T many films which are still watched 25 years after their release, but as “Showgirls” struts towards its silver anniversary, it can boast millions of DVD sales, regular cinema screenings, an off-Broadway musical adaptation, a crowdfunded sequel featuring several original cast members and now a documentary, “You Don’t Nomi”, which examines its continued popularity. What is so remarkable about all this is that, back in 1995, “Showgirls” was a box-office bomb and a critical disaster. It went on to win seven of the Golden Raspberry awards which are given to the year’s biggest turkeys. Its detractors call it one of the worst films ever made. Its fans have much the same opinion. The director responsible was Paul Verhoeven, who had moved from the Netherlands to America and made two science-fiction blockbusters, “RoboCop” (1987) and “Total Recall” (1990). The screenplay was by Joe Eszterhas, who had scripted “Flashdance” (1983) and “Jagged Edge” (1985), and who liked to remind people that he was Hollywood’s highest-paid screenwriter. Messrs Verhoeven and Eszterhas had a hit in 1992 with their sexually explicit Hitchcock pastiche, “Basic Instinct”, and their big-budget reunion was tipped to be even more risqué and controversial: one of its selling points was its restrictive NC-17 rating. But when “Showgirls” came out, the reviews didn’t talk much about how daring it was. They talked about how stupid, tacky and pretentious it was, and how it managed to make stripping, nudity and sex itself seem about as erotic as a driving-theory test. The film’s heroine is Nomi (Elizabeth Berkley), a young woman who hitch-hikes to Las Vegas and gets a job as a dancer in a glitzy topless revue, where she eventually understudies for the lead, Cristal (Gina Gershon). That precis makes the story sound a lot more coherent than it is. Mr Eszterhas, who was paid a $2m advance for his screenplay, discards subplots as readily as Nomi discards her clothes, and he turns out dialogue which sounds as if it was generated by a malfunctioning computer. The relationship between Nomi and her friend Molly, for instance, appears to be based on the shaky foundation that any discussion of nail polish has them both laughing in delight. For the rest of the film, Nomi is less cheerful. She shouts, swears and stomps off in a huff whenever anyone says anything remotely negative, and yet she is somehow adored by everyone she meets. Only the most charismatic actress alive could have made this walking temper tantrum plausible, let alone sympathetic. Ms Berkley, who had been a teen star on a high-school sitcom, “Saved By The Bell”, was not that actress. When “Showgirls” flopped, it ruined her career; Mr Verhoeven’s and Mr Esterhasz’s days in Hollywood were numbered, too. But the film itself didn’t go away. Within a year of its release, it had been revived as a “midnight movie” in New York, with raucous screenings hosted by drag queens and attended by crowds who cheered and jeered at its most excruciating moments. By 2004 its distributor, MGM, had cottoned on to its camp appeal, re-releasing the DVD in an edition which played up to its reputation, and included a commentary by a writer and “Showgirls”-mocker, David Schmader. When Nomi is hitch-hicking in the opening scene, he says, it’s “like a Martian looked up hitch-hiking in the dictionary”. Mr Schmader is one of the contributors to “You Don’t Nomi”, a sharp, thoughtful documentary which is a lot more intelligent than the film it analyses. It acknowledges Mr Verhoeven’s technical and visual flair, and it floats the theory that his satirical intentions have been overlooked. But the documentary’s director, Jeffrey McHale, cannot avoid the conclusion that what fascinates people about “Showgirls” is that such a uniquely awful monstrosity could ever have been made. One critic in “You Don’t Nomi” waxes lyrical about Mr Verhoeven’s interesting use of mirrors. The next critic scoffs that if you’re praising “Showgirls” because it has some mirrors in it, you’re clutching at straws. An actor who plays Nomi in the off-Broadway musical claims to be paying tribute to Ms Berkley, but, judging by what viewers see of the production, her performance is a merciless parody of Ms Berkley’s histrionics. A poet is so obsessed by “Showgirls” that he has written a book of sestinas in homage, but even he acknowledges that the film is “bad”. Still, there must be something special about it. Mr Verhoeven served up another batch of sex and violence, “Hollow Man”, in 2000, and Mr Eszterhas scripted another supposedly erotic thriller, “Jade”, which came out just a few weeks after “Showgirls” in 1995. But neither film has much of a following today. “Showgirls” has a magical ingredient which they lack, or maybe several magical ingredients: catfights, lesbian kisses, unflattering haircuts, chimpanzees in star-spangled waistcoats and bucketfuls of glitter. Maybe the crucial difference is that “Hollow Man” and “Jade” just weren’t quite dreadful enough. Mr Verhoeven summed it up when he attended the Golden Raspberry award ceremony in 1996. Make a bad film, and it’ll be forgotten, he said. Make the worst film of the year, and everyone will remember. “You Don’t Nomi” was released digitally on June 9th