THE PANDEMIC in Africa will not be just a crisis of public health or the economy. It risks becoming a political emergency that threatens the democratic progress that countries across the continent have made in recent years. Africa is poorly placed to deal with the situation. Only a few countries have social safety nets and fiscal space to cushion the impact of the severe economic recession that both the IMF and World Bank forecasts. Millions of people may lose their jobs or other sources of income. This will cause widespread social distress and possibly political upheaval, especially among young people who lack work and opportunity more than ever. This convergence of economic, social and political crises threatens stability. Ironically, democratic elections will be the match that lights the fuse. At least 18 African countries including Ethiopia, Ghana and Ivory Coast are expected to hold national elections in 2020. The majority of them are in the midst of conflicts or are just emerging from them, such as Niger, Burkina Faso and the Central African Republic. The governments face a tremendous challenge: impose strict social restrictions to prevent contagion, while at the same time let citizens meaningfully participate in the electoral process. This presents complex questions involving fundamental human rights, the integrity of democracy and the legitimacy of governments. The answers will mean difficult trade-offs. But the people and leaders of Africa must be vigilant to ensure that the pandemic does not become an excuse simply to avoid or postpone elections for political advantage, or to institute authoritarian and anti-democratic measures in the name of public health. What can be done to secure the democratic gains and individual freedoms that Africans have secured in recent times, often at great cost? There are several steps that governments and the public can take, based on recommendations from an international group of electoral experts convened by the Kofi Annan Foundation. The foundational principle is the rule of law. Emergency measures on elections should be grounded in constitutional provisions and electoral laws. Where the national legal framework does not anticipate the current situation, legal changes should be made in line with internationally accepted standards. The postponement of elections should not be open-ended. Rather, there should be clarity and agreement on when the health situation permits elections to take place with a reasonable assurance of safety. Next, political trust. Leaders should consult widely to build consensus across the political landscape. If they do not, emergency measures may be perceived as a strategy for political gain by incumbents. This subverts the public trust needed to address the health crisis. Third, transparency. Governments and electoral authorities should provide clear and frequent communication with the public. Citizens will need to understand what measures are being considered, by whom and on what grounds. The media and civil-society groups have a crucial role to play to preserve democracy by monitoring policies, fostering debate and shining light on critical issues. Governments must protect the freedom of expression. Cover-ups in politics, as in health, only make matters worse. Finally, the principle of proportionality. Any measures that governments take—such as protection at polling stations, or changes in how voters are registered, ballots are cast or votes are counted—should be reasonable and proportionate to the health risk. The virus is not an excuse to ignore sound electoral practice. Election experts should be consulted as early as possible. Even with free and fair elections, Africa’s democracy is threatened by fragile economies. Countries will need substantial assistance to get through the crisis. Governments and their international partners must avoid the failed policies of the past, when even though debt was forgiven or rescheduled, budgets for education and health care were slashed. This contributed to the serial unrest that overwhelmed many countries. Imposing fiscal austerity amid mass unemployment would threaten stability and democratic progress. Hard times often make people especially vulnerable to the siren song of populists and extremists trading on communal enmities. Only with measures like these can Africa prevent a health crisis from killing its nascent democracies. _____________ Alan Doss is the outgoing president of the Kofi Annan Foundation and a former senior UN official with extensive experience in Africa. Mo Ibrahim is the founder of Celtel, an international mobile operator, and the chairman of the Mo Ibrahim Foundation, which promotes leadership and good public governance in Africa. Read more:Dambisa Moyo on a “Marshall Plan” for AfricaMore articles in the “By invitation” series