BOB DYLAN’S fans have been rigorously analysing his music for decades. “Dylanology”, as the practice is called, began in 1969 when Alan Weberman, a writer and obsessive, created a word concordance of Mr Dylan’s lyrics (he later rifled through the musician’s rubbish bins for further clues). An archive of 6,000 items—including handwritten manuscripts, notebooks and correspondence—is stored at the University of Tulsa. Books and dissertations have been written on Mr Dylan’s work, and many of his admirers consider him a poet worthy of comparison to Ovid and John Keats. They felt vindicated when Mr Dylan won the Nobel prize for literature in 2016. On Instagram, listeners post questions about specific lyrics, often from albums released long ago. A new record, “Rough and Rowdy Ways”, Mr Dylan’s first album of new music since 2012, offers plenty of intriguing fodder for diehard fans. The first single, “Murder Most Foul”, was released on March 27th; it is a 17-minute spoken-word screed about the assassination of John F. Kennedy. In another, “I Contain Multitudes”, Mr Dylan compares himself to Indiana Jones, William Blake, Edgar Allan Poe and Anne Frank. Richard Thomas, a professor at Harvard and the author of “Why Dylan Matters”, was called upon to decode a reference to an Irish village for the Times. Paul Muldoon, a poet, and Daniel Epstein, the author of “The Ballad of Bob Dylan: A Portrait”, also provided commentary on Mr Dylan’s long-standing interest in Irish music and literature. However, if you want to truly understand Mr Dylan, you should listen to his radio show. “Theme Time Radio Hour”, a series of hour-long broadcasts, ran on Sirius XM from 2006 to 2009; it was the musician’s first and only foray into public radio. The episodes are available to stream via a website run by the Bob Dylan Fan Club, accompanied by annotations and even a spin-off podcast. Listening to “Theme Time Radio Hour” feels like sneaking a glance at Mr Dylan’s diary. Each instalment revolves around a theme, seemingly chosen at random: “Women’s Names”, “Days of the Week”, “Blood”, “Numbers 11 and Up” or (the wryly named) “Famous People”. Mr Dylan’s impressive knowledge of American music history collides with his predilection for miscellany. He quotes a Buddhist proverb before playing “Paper Moon” by Big Dee Irwin. He reads fragments of Thucydides then describes Little Richard’s musical process. This is Mr Dylan at his most eclectic and scholarly, retrieving music from gospel groups, juxtaposing them with Emily Dickinson’s poetry and calling Igor Stravinsky “a madman with a fountain pen” two songs later. It may sound arcane, but “Theme Time Radio Hour” is always entertaining and often playful. In contrast with the seriousness and intensity often associated with his work, Mr Dylan makes jokes and bad puns. In the episode themed “Street Map”, he reels off a list of road names, before saying, “I may not be a Rhodes Scholar, but I got my share of street smarts!” In “Spring Cleaning” he reads out instructions on how to make a good multi-purpose spray; in “Fruits” he wonders at the fact that the humble apple inspired Isaac Newton’s discovery of the three laws of motion. On occasion Mr Dylan reveals personal anecdotes, such as his observation that Joni Mitchell is a good driver. “Theme Time Radio Hour” is thus suitable for the casual as well as the avid Dylan fan. Hearing him discuss his cultural touchstones or make connections between a stanza of poetry and a piano lick is intriguing in and of itself, but it also enriches the experience of listening to his songs. For enthusiasts who are tempted to decipher Mr Dylan’s music, “Theme Time Radio Hour” may be something like the master key.