ON APRIL 9TH, as daily British deaths from covid-19 hit their peak, Vikingur Olafsson began a remote “residency” of weekly broadcasts for “Front Row”, an arts programme on BBC radio. From the empty Harpa concert hall in his home city of Reykjavik, the Icelandic pianist played a transcription of an “Ave Maria” by his compatriot, the physician-composer Sigvaldi Kaldalons. He dedicated the performance to health workers everywhere, summoning a magical moment during days of fear and foreboding. Since the 19th century a few pianists have had the gift of reaching out beyond the regular ranks of classical-music lovers to touch and grip a wider public. Mr Olafsson, whose thoughtful and innovative approach feels far removed from the romantic grandstanding of many traditional piano stars, has swiftly joined their company. He signed with the prestigious Deutsche Grammophon record label in 2016, and released an album devoted to the mesmeric piano works of the American former “minimalist” (and film-soundtrack favourite) Philip Glass. His next collection, of pieces by Johann Sebastian Bach, won a clutch of awards. In 2019 he was named Artist of the Year by Gramophone magazine, the audiophiles’ bible. His new solo album, “Debussy-Rameau”, finds an “unlikely affinity” between works by two French composers seldom thought of as musical kindred. On its release in March the record topped the classical charts in Britain and Germany (where it even rose to number 11 in the pop-music charts). From the time of Franz Liszt, many star pianists have cultivated flamboyant and extroverted stage personas. Others, most notoriously the maverick Canadian genius Glenn Gould, have shunned the limelight to pursue icy perfection in solitude. Thanks in part to Nordic stereotypes, Mr Olafsson tends to be seen as a “cool” virtuoso, although his playing reflects a very modern eclecticism. “I don’t adhere to a single school,” he says. “I never have and I never will. That’s part of being alive in the 21st century—to go into the past with an open mind, and open ears.” As a young musician enchanted by the lush sound of pre-war “Golden Age” pianists, “I would be very prone to romantic extremes,” he remembers. “Whereas today I’m sometimes criticised for being too much of a classicist!” His keyboard personality can be cerebral, but never cold. Indeed, he admires the famously passionate Martha Argerich beyond all living pianists. Above all, Mr Olafsson invites listeners to join an intimate journey of exploration—to hear familiar music in new ways, or discover links between known and unknown pieces—rather than battering them with show-off brilliance. Although he enjoys the concert routine that covid-19 has disrupted, he crafts each album as a recorded work of art rather than an imitation of a live gig. “I think of the album as a composition, almost a collage,” he says. He fills each collection with shorter pieces, carefully curated, rather than concerto-length works. This bite-sized method fits today’s streaming technology, and he monitors how well each track performs on services such as Spotify. Thus the metrics for the final item will tell Mr Olafsson “how successful I was in keeping my audience with me for the entire duration of the album”. The pandemic abruptly halted his whirlwind touring schedule: Mr Olafsson spent 180 days last year away from home. During this enforced hiatus he has not only studied new repertoire, such as English Renaissance keyboard music by William Byrd and Orlando Gibbons, but, faced with the “clean white empty page” of a shutdown, he began to imagine a more balanced future for classical music as a whole. He would like to see less frantic touring, longer breaks for artists to refresh their careers, more spontaneous programming, and shorter, more informal concerts. Why should gigs not last one hour rather than an entire evening divided by an interval? “That will mean more intense music-making, and more intense listening.” This crisis may finally break the stranglehold of 19th-century concert convention: “We somehow haven’t had the courage or the originality to change that.” The child of musicians, Mr Olafsson grew up in Iceland just before the internet, with few classical concerts and hardly any visiting stars. He can still recall every detail of a recital by Russian pianist Evgeny Kissin in Reykjavik in 1996. The solitude of his homeland in lockdown, “when you take away all the tourism and all the flux of people and ideas”, has reminded him of that self-sufficient island of the past, “a very secluded place, very tranquil”. It was a creative laboratory where isolation bred collaboration across genre boundaries. He pays tribute to Björk, Iceland’s avant-garde pop superstar, and her effect on the nation’s arts: “She led the way, and her influence can’t be overestimated on the way subsequent generations of composers and performers, myself included, have behaved.” The virus has now receded in Iceland and foreign travel has just returned. Even concerts—with social distancing—have resumed. In early June, Mr Olafsson played a Mozart concerto to 500 people (the permitted maximum) in the Harpa auditorium. Afterwards, the hall filled with “rock-star applause, not the kind you usually get. I don’t think it had much to do with how I played the Mozart but something much bigger than that—the fact that we were there together.” Now Mr Olafsson, whose art of dialogue and discovery has touched many locked-down listeners, will search for even closer kinds of musical togetherness.