RESEARCHERS IN BRITAIN announced a breakthrough this week in the treatment of covid-19. In a trial dexamethasone, a cheap steroid, cut death rates among the most seriously ill patients (ie, those needing ventilation or supplementary oxygen). Alas, the record of Britain’s government has been far less heartening. In a YouGov poll asking people in 22 countries to rate their leaders’ handling of the pandemic, only Mexicans gave their government worse marks. Britain was slower to lock down than other European countries; it has been tardy, too, in testing and in recommending mask-wearing. Add in other unfavourable factors—many old people in poorly protected care homes, an overweight population, a high share of people from ethnic groups that appear more vulnerable to the disease—and the outcome has been grim. Britain has the highest overall death rate among rich countries, and is also forecast to suffer the deepest recession. The government (and the prime minister) are not solely to blame. But ministers were chosen on ideological grounds rather than for their competence. In a pandemic, that is proving costly. Seventy-five years ago this coming Friday, the UN’s founding charter was signed in San Francisco. Though there have been no world wars since and the organisation (unlike its precursor, the League of Nations) has proven resilient, the world order is rickety. It is struggling to cope with the rise of China, but it is suffering worst from neglect by America, the country that has done most to underpin it; it is being further damaged by antagonism between the two. Covid-19 has intensified its difficulties (and has led to the worsening of armed conflicts around the world). With or without help from whoever is in the White House, middle-sized powers must take on more multilateral work themselves. Some already are, for example in establishing regional trade agreements. In recent weeks soldiers from China and India have brawled several times along their sketchy, disputed border in the Himalayas. On June 15th a fight with sticks and stones left at least 20 Indian troops dead, the first combat casualties there for 45 years. Chinese casualties are unknown. Neither side seeks escalation and China especially has played down the incident. India is not a target of Chinese nationalists’ ire. Yet elsewhere, China is becoming more assertive in a world distracted by covid-19. In the South China Sea, for example, it has been tightening its grip; and there is speculation that it may soon try to exert control of the skies above it. During the pandemic, even more of life, from shopping to work meetings, has been shifted online. On the face of it, this is a boon for Amazon, whose shares hit a record high this week. The giant pioneer of e-retailing is delivering ever more packages; and its cloud-computing division, which contributed 77% of operating income in the last quarter, serves a host of other companies (not least Netflix and Zoom). Nonetheless Jeff Bezos’s empire is vulnerable. Competitors are getting sharper: Amazon’s share of American online spending has fallen in the pandemic. In the developing world, where growth is fastest, it is not the top dog (it has quit China altogether). Critics of its labour practices are on its back. So are regulators and America’s president. While the world has been in lockdown, the luxury-goods business has been in hibernation. Between March and May sales were down by 75%, year-on-year. Though trade has begun to recover, prospects are far from sparkling. Unless international tourism rebounds, firms will have to sell more in China: Chinese customers accounted for 35% of bling sales last year, most of it during jaunts abroad. Posh brands are getting less sniffy about online sales, which were only 7-8% of the total in 2019. In many other industries, such a slump in sales might lead to consolidation. Probably not in luxury. The biggest names have solid balance-sheets, and can expect to bounce back; and many smaller ones are owned by families who will resist selling their heirlooms.