WITH THEIR favourite museums, theatres and opera houses closed due to the coronavirus, arts lovers have had no choice but to access culture online. Institutions have made that very easy to do, making huge quantities of digital content available, often for free. The Metropolitan Opera in New York, for example, has streamed a different show from its archive every day since the theatre shut its doors; more than 9.1m people have tuned in since March 16th. The National Theatre in London has made old productions available to stream for a week on YouTube. “One Man, Two Guvnors” amassed almost 3m views. Livestreaming allows these institutions to reach new fans. Yet when so much content is available to so many, how do organisations ensure that they continue to reward their most loyal supporters—those whose regular donations are a vital contribution to their revenue? Membership of an arts organisation usually comes with a range of benefits, almost all of which have little relevance as people are stuck at home. Exclusive members’ lounges are closed. Gone are the opportunities to hobnob at private views or first-night parties. Priority booking is not exactly a perk when there is nothing to book. Many institutions are offering their members virtual gatherings designed to imitate these events. The Los Angeles County Museum of Art (LACMA, pictured) recently livestreamed a lecture by one of its senior curators on “Fiji: Art & Life in the Pacific”, one of the exhibitions on display when the museum closed in March. Over 400 members attended, more than would be usual for live events in the museum’s Art 101 series, says a LACMA spokeswoman. Creating digital content exclusively for members or offering priority access to online culture are also ways of rewarding supporters. The Royal Shakespeare Company is giving its patrons a free video preview of the company’s recent production of “King John”, which had to finish its run early due to the pandemic. The most difficult aspect of the cultural experience to recreate is the social one: mixers over Zoom are hardly a replacement for the feeling of communion audience members get when watching live performances. The membership team at the Royal Philharmonic Orchestra (RPO) recognised that and set up RPO Phone Buddies, a scheme that pairs supporters with musicians for one-off or regular phone calls. The aim is to approximate the social side of concerts, particularly for elderly patrons who might not be as technically savvy as their younger counterparts. It is a small programme—James Williams, the orchestra’s managing director, estimates that 15 to 20 calls take place each week—but one that is much appreciated by those involved. Mr Williams reports plenty of positive feedback, including from one participant who called the idea “a big silver-lining to the present situation”. The Phone Buddies scheme, and the various digital initiatives the RPO has launched to keep in touch with audiences until concerts resume, represent a valuable opportunity, says Mr Williams. “There will be learning in terms of how we can better embrace the talents of our musicians but also about what we can learn from our audiences,” he says. “We’ve learned a lot about people’s motivations for wanting to engage with great orchestral music.” Some organisations, such as art galleries, will be able to reopen soon—albeit with strict social-distancing and hygiene measures in place—and ticket revenue will be crucial if they are to recoup the losses of the last few months. Those outfits that have maintained a strong connection with their most loyal audience members will be more likely to survive the challenging times ahead.