MEDIEVAL ENGLAND has a bad reputation. The average British adult will shudder at the memory of school history lessons about plague, poverty and baffling poetry. Now these faulty notions are being swept away by a new book, or rather a very old book newly made available to the public. It doesn’t boast a thrilling title, but the “St Albans Benefactors’ Book” is a rare and richly illustrated guide to life in the Middle Ages. Started in the year 1380 by the monks of St Albans abbey, the book was intended as a written and visual record of all those people, up and down the social hierarchy, who donated to the monastery. Thanks to the efforts of the British Library, this lively scrapbook of medieval society is now available to read free online. Despite covid-19, the library’s manuscript team conducted the entire digitisation project during lockdown, and as a result everyone from bored adults to home-schooled children can now look afresh at the world of the Middle Ages. The abbey was already centuries old when the book began, and its original purpose was to showcase an illustrious heritage extending back to King Offa of Mercia, who founded the place in the 8th century. But the wily monks left many pages blank in anticipation of future donors. Over the years, as the pages filled up along with the abbey’s coffers, more and more blank sheets were pasted in, ready to be decorated with portraits of patrons. The “Benefactors’ Book” was splayed prominently on the main altar of the abbey and was cared for by Thomas Walsingham, the foremost historian of the late 14th century. To help with the portraiture Walsingham hired a professional artist, prosaically named “Alan”. His detailed paintings dazzled contemporaries, and Alan was permitted to include his own self-portrait in the book. The written entry beside his image tells of the artist’s good nature: when the abbey offered to reimburse him for his painting materials, he told them to keep the money as another donation. While the monks of St Albans were putting their book together, not far away Geoffrey Chaucer penned his famous chronicle of medieval England, “The Canterbury Tales”. That collection of stories focuses on another religious site in Canterbury, yet it bears a similarity to the “Benefactors’ Book”, since both are a sort of “Who’s Who” of medieval England. But whereas Chaucer depicted the various social ranks with scathing satire, from the noble knight down to the penitent parson, the “Benefactors’ Book” tends to show St Albans’ generous patrons in a flattering light. The reader learns, for example, that Nigel the miller gave handsomely to the abbey. Alan painted him holding a pouch of gold, his donation, and wearing a chic azure tunic. Nigel cuts a respectable figure, far more respectable than Chaucer’s fictional miller in “The Canterbury Tales”, a vulgar drunk who tells tales of sexual deviance on the road to Canterbury cathedral. Were all the benefactors of St Albans giving selflessly? Perhaps not. Those who donated to the abbey became members of the St Albans “confraternity”, an elite social network headed by the abbot. Eleanor Jackson of the British Library suspects this was an attraction for many locals: “As well as spiritual brownie points, there were lots of social and professional benefits to being a benefactor.” Along with a place in the book and the ear of the local abbot, club bonuses included a parade through the town to induct the new member and a large celebratory dinner. Though abbeys were often places of great learning, the book shows that St Albans was an exceptional home of innovation. Among the gifts painted in the book is an astronomical clock designed by Richard of Wallingford. Wallingford had modest beginnings as the son of a blacksmith, but rose via a monastic education to become St Albans’ abbot. During his stint in that role he designed and built the clock, which at the time was probably the most sophisticated in the world. Unfortunately, the Benefactors’ book is the only surviving image of Wallingford’s creation (pictured, top), which was melted down for scrap during Henry VIII’s dissolution of the monasteries. In fact, it is a miracle that the book survived the Tudor reformation. While donations kept flowing in over the centuries, with the “Benefactors’ Book” constantly updated, things came to an abrupt halt in the winter of 1539. On December 5th that year royal commissioners entered the abbey, looted its treasures, destroyed what they could not carry and expelled the monks. While the building’s extraordinary Norman architecture survived—as an Anglican cathedral—the world of the “Benefactors’ Book” was over. Thanks to the British Library’s comprehensive efforts readers can once again be entertained and educated by its richly illustrated pages.■ For information on this and other digitisation projects, visit the British Library’s blog: https://blogs.bl.uk/digitisedmanuscripts/