AMAZON PRIME Video’s latest release, “7500”, is unlikely to be used as in-flight entertainment. An intense hijacking drama starring Joseph Gordon-Levitt, the film stages a battle between a brutal band of Islamist terrorists who try to take over a passenger jet and the co-pilot who struggles to stop them. What separates it from other entries in this not-for-nervous-fliers subgenre is that nearly all of it is set within the claustrophobia-inducing confines of the plane’s cramped cockpit, and there are rarely more than two people on screen. Anyone who is currently in self-isolation can rest assured that the co-pilot has even less room for manoeuvre than they do. The only sequence with a more spacious setting is the opening montage, which consists of fuzzy security-camera footage of the foyer of a Berlin airport. Several young men can be seen buying bottles of spirits in the duty-free shop, walking into the toilets and sitting in the departure lounge. None of them does anything ominous, but, well, the viewer is seeing them for a reason. The film then cuts to the interior of a plane which is about to fly to Paris. An affable German captain, Michael (Carlo Kitzlinger), chats to his first officer, Tobias (Mr Gordon-Levitt), a quiet American who happens to be engaged to one of the cabin attendants, Gökce (Aylin Tezel), the mother of his two-year-old son. Then the young men from the security-camera footage get onboard. Once the cockpit door is closed for take-off, the camera stays inside with the pilots. They have a small CCTV screen to show them the other side of the door, but that’s it: there are no flashbacks to happier times or news reports from the ground. Like Michael and Tobias, the viewer is locked inside one small room lit by nothing but the glow of monitors and illuminated buttons. Even after the young men charge to the front of the plane, and Michael is injured, the action does not go anywhere else. What is impressive about “7500” is how uncontrived its restricted setting seems. There is a long history of films set in enclosed spaces, from Alfred Hitchcock’s “Rope” (1948) to Roman Polanski’s “Carnage” (2011) and Rodrigo Cortés’s “Buried” (2010), in which Ryan Reynolds’s character is shut in a coffin throughout. Such films sometimes feel like tricksy technical experiments. In this one, it is so logical that Tobias would stay in the cockpit that the viewer never questions it. He has no choice: he would be breaking regulations and risking dozens of lives if he opened the cockpit door. But if he doesn’t open it, everyone else onboard is at the mercy of the terrorists, including Gökce. The most gut-wrenching aspect of this nightmarish scenario is that he can only listen to and imagine what is happening to her. In a Hollywood movie, Tobias might have sneaked out via a secret hatch or improvised a plan to pick off the terrorists one by one, but even though Mr Gordon-Levitt played Bruce Willis’s younger self in “Looper”, “7500” is a “Die Hard”-type scenario without a John McClane. Much of the film has the authenticity of a documentary, and Mr Gordon-Levitt dials down his charisma to play a nerdy everyman who is neither quick-thinking nor brave enough to qualify as a hero. He is an ordinary person in an impossible situation. The twist is that the terrorists soon run out of options, too. The writer-director, Patrick Vollrath, is less interested in the ecstasy of defeating bad guys than in the agony of being powerless. That isn’t quite enough of a subject to fill 90 minutes, and the film’s last half-hour is more fanciful, more clichéd and less gripping than the rest of it. But for the previous hour, “7500” is almost as nerve-racking as Paul Greengrass’s masterly hijacking dramas, “United 93” (2006), based on the September 11th attacks, and “Captain Phillips” (2013), inspired by the Maersk Alabama hijacking. It is a lesson in how a small setting can be used not just to keep the budget low, but to keep the tension high. “7500” is streaming on Amazon Prime Video now