STUN GRENADES, an internet blackout, water cannons, tear-gas, armoured personnel carriers and bloodied protesters. These are not the signs of the great popular support claimed by Alexander Lukashenko, the president of Belarus, following an election on August 9th. But after 26 years in charge of a small country sandwiched between Russia and Poland, these are the only means by which the longest-serving autocrat in Europe can stay in power—for now. The official result, which gives Mr Lukashenko almost 80% of the vote, has little to do with reality. The election itself was designed not to establish the true will of the people, but to allow Mr Lukashenko to rule unchallenged. Prominent opposition figures were jailed or chased out of the country, most independent observers were barred, foreign media harassed and opinion polls banned. “Preliminary” voting was stretched to a week to allow, some said, for greater rigging. Mr Lukashenko had done this many times before—the last time Belarus had a free and fair election was when he himself was elected president in 1994. This time, however, the scale of protest and the level of violence unleashed by the state against its own people suggests that Mr Lukashenko did not just rig an election to make his victory more impressive. He may have actually lost the election. This is all the more significant since his challenger was not a politician or a traditional leader of the opposition. Svetlana Tikhanovskaya, a 37-year-old English-language teacher, has no political experience or ambition; she only put herself forward as a candidate after her husband, a popular vlogger who had challenged Mr Lukashenko, was arrested to stop him from running in the election. But over the past few weeks she has become a symbol of a popular revolt against Mr Lukashenko that consolidated all opposition forces. Her simple promise to let out political prisoners and hold a free and fair election within six months of Mr Lukashenko’s ousting electrified Belarus. The atmosphere of defiance and disobedience has spread throughout the country. At a public event organised for Mr Lukashenko, independent-minded DJs defiantly played an iconic rock-song from the 1980s called “We want changes!”, which served as a soundtrack to the crumbling of the Soviet façade that Mr Lukashenko managed to restore in Belarus. Even before polling stations opened on August 9th, the obedient central electoral commission announced that some 40% of Belarusians had already cast their votes in preliminary ballots. But on election day itself, queues of voters outside polling stations eagerly waiting to get rid of Mr Lukashenko stretched over several kilometres. When they were told that less than 10% of them had voted for Ms Tikhanovskaya, they came onto the streets in great numbers to protest. Mr Lukashenko sent in soldiers and riot police who viciously beat up protesters. A police van rammed through a crowd, injuring people. At least one person was reported dead. Journalists were detained and social media in Minsk, the capital, were brought to a halt by an internet blackout. Ms Tikhanovskaya has refused to accept the rigged result. She has good reason to think that she might have won. The real numbers may never be known but in a few polling stations in Minsk where independent observers managed to stop the rigging, Ms Tikhanovskaya won between 70% and 80% of the votes. She has appealed to the police and the armed forces not to fight their own people, and called on the government to negotiate a peaceful transfer of power. But the chances of this taking place are slim. And as mass demonstrations continued for the second night across the country, the protesters became more radical and the police more violent. Mr Lukashenko is a model dictator and has already been congratulated on his victory by fellow autocrats, Vladimir Putin of Russia and Xi Jinping of China. Belarus has long been a model for Russia’s authoritarianism and Mr Putin would not tolerate a “colour revolution” there of the sort that took place in Ukraine in 2004. Poland has called for an emergency EU summit to discuss the crisis. EU officials have demanded an end to violence and the publishing of accurate results. What happens next, however, will be decided not in Moscow or Brussels, but on the streets in Minsk. The lack of a more established political leader or a party that could spearhead rather than just symbolise the protest is a weakness of the reformers. But the fact that the protest is spontaneous and broad also makes it harder for Mr Lukashenko to put it down. An experienced autocrat, Mr Lukashenko hopes to use fear and repression to see him through this crisis—just as he did ten years ago, when a rigged election was followed by a violent crackdown. But however loyal the police may seem— for now—they cannot restore Mr Lukashenko’s legitimacy. Belarus, well-known for its perseverance and defiance during the second world war, may now see more protests and a general strike. Although it is yet to lose Mr Lukashenko, he already appears to have lost his people.