WITH PRESIDENT DONALD TRUMP trailing by about ten points in the polls, he will be hoping that this week’s Republican convention—normally a reliable source of media attention and campaign cash—will provide a much-needed boost to his re-election campaign. He may be disappointed. Although support for the incumbent party’s candidate usually increases after the convention, challengers also get bounces—and neither are as big as they used to be. And this year several factors, not least the covid-19 pandemic, may mean Mr Trump gets an even smaller boost. To understand the effect of conventions on political fortunes, The Economist has analysed American presidential polls dating back to 1948. We found that between 1948 and 1992, support for the incumbent party’s candidate increased by an average of three percentage points in the two weeks after the convention. In 1980 support for Jimmy Carter surged by 12 percentage points after the Democrats’ gathering in Madison Square Garden in New York (though that didn’t spare him a trouncing by Ronald Reagan). Since 1996, however, post-convention enthusiasm has waned. In the past six elections, the incumbent party’s candidate has enjoyed a bump in the polls of just two points, on average (see chart). Political polarisation may be partly to blame. According to our figures, the share of swing voters—those Americans who have voted for both Democrats and Republicans in presidential elections—has shrunk from 11% in the mid-1900s to 5% today. The trend explains about half of the reduction in convention bounces. The growing influence of primary contests may also be a factor: as Americans tune in to presidential elections earlier in the cycle, many voters are making up their minds before the convention festivities ever begin. The fact that recent candidates have been well known to the public means that voters are deciding even sooner. Mr Trump’s convention bounce will probably be even smaller than usual. For one thing, his polling numbers have been remarkably stable. According to The Economist’s forecast, Joe Biden, the Democratic nominee, has been leading Mr Trump in the polls by between eight and 11 percentage points since the beginning of June. The standard deviation of this year’s polling average—a measure of volatility—has been just 0.9 percentage points, the lowest on record. In other words, it seems that despite the chaotic news cycle, very few people are changing their minds—as Mr Trump needs them to do if he is to win. Covid-19 presents the president with two further difficulties. The coronavirus has forced the two main parties to produce made-for-TV, infomercial-style, virtual conventions that are attracting smaller audiences than in the past. The first night of the Republican convention drew 17m viewers, according to Nielsen, a ratings firm, down by 26% from 2016. The handling of the coronavirus is also one of Mr Trump’s weaker issues. According to a recent poll by YouGov, his net approval rating on the pandemic is a dismal -10%. Americans also say by a seven-point margin that they are more confident in Mr Biden’s ability to handle the coronavirus (43%) than in Mr Trump’s (36%). As long as covid-19 remains a central issue of the campaign, it will probably reflect poorly on the president. Dig deeper:Sign up and listen to Checks and Balance, our weekly newsletter and podcast on American politics, and explore our presidential election forecast