MOST OF CARLOS MIGUEL PRIETO’S classmates from Princeton and Harvard Business School have built typical business careers. After applying or being headhunted for a job, they undergo a recruitment process lasting weeks or perhaps months. If successful, they do the role for a few years before moving on elsewhere and starting again: a recent study by Korn Ferry, a consultancy, found that even top executives have brief tenures, with CEOs remaining in place for an average of eight years. Mr Prieto, by contrast, has stuck with a number of his jobs for more than a decade each; he is currently considering what position he might like in three or four years’ time. Mr Prieto is an orchestral conductor, a profession so rarefied that most major appointments require a lengthy and careful courting process. Moves are planned many years in advance. “In most careers, people’s prime occurs in the first 20 to 30 years,” Mr Prieto says. “In orchestral conducting it’s not like that, because you learn by doing and by building a repertoire. That takes time. It’s also a matter of maturity.” The main jobs go to the seasoned professionals and there is a low turnover of staff—unlike CEOs, conductors are rarely ousted from their position.  Mr Prieto, who is 54, has been music director of the National Symphony Orchestra of Mexico and the Louisiana Philharmonic Orchestra for more than a decade, and music director of the Orchestra of the Americas since 2011. He doesn’t “know a single conductor who has changed jobs ten times in 20 years”. Riccardo Muti (pictured), now aged 78, has been the music director of the Chicago Symphony Orchestra since 2010; he had previously been music director of the Philadelphia Orchestra (another of the “Big Five” orchestras in America) and La Scala in Milan. Sir Simon Rattle, the music director of London Symphony Orchestra (LSO) is, at 64, similarly experienced: he arrived in London after a 16-year tenure as principal conductor of the Berlin Philharmonic. Though some current top music directors are still in their 40s—Andris Nelsons of the Boston Philharmonic, for example, is 41—they too have accrued music-director experience by means of multi-year directorships at important ensembles. Reaching the pinnacle of orchestral conducting (ie, getting a music director post at the Berlin Philharmonic, one of the Big Fives, La Scala, the LSO or a small number of other groups) is a rare and celebrated achievement. The years of deliberation that precede an appointment makes conducting more of an old man’s game. There is often a lag, too, between the appointment and the music director assuming their post. Sir Simon, for example, started his LSO job two years after being hired. Still, a few key posts are currently held by young conductors, including the Los Angeles Philharmonic, where Gustavo Dudamel, a superstar from Venezuela, took over as chief conductor aged 28. The City of Birmingham Symphony Orchestra is led by Mirga Grazinyte-Tyla, who assumed the post aged 30. But they are, like young heads of state, exceptions. Like many voters, orchestral musicians are unforgiving and uninterested in working with someone who needs to learn on the job. A conductor has to be a master of the craft to win their respect. Sadly, sudden vacancies are usually only created by a maestro’s untimely death. When Mariss Jansons, a Latvian conductor, died in November, he was in charge of two top ensembles: Amsterdam’s Royal Concertgebouw Orchestra and the Bavarian Radio Symphony Orchestra, which he had directed for more than a decade each. Both orchestras will probably use guest conductors until they appoint permanent music directors; all contenders will have the chops to conduct a repertoire ranging from Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart to Arnold Schönberg. In orchestral conducting, there is no such thing as “faking it until you make it”.