America’s stockmarket ended 2018 limply, tumbling by 15% between the end of November and Christmas Eve. Not 2019: the market rang out the old year in celebratory style, apparently cheered by a mini trade deal between America and China, which is due to be signed this month. The year as a whole was the best since 2013. The S&P 500 climbed by 28.9%. Global share prices also had a good year. Will 2020 be as jolly? Maybe not. The effects of monetary easing seem to be largely played out. Economic growth in America is slowing. The market is already pricey by past standards, measured by the ratio of share prices to profits. And election years tend to be turbulent times for stocks.  Our cover this week examines the strained relationship between America and China. The trade truce notwithstanding, a partial dismantling of the bonds between the superpowers is already under way. The split, our leader argues, will reshape the world economy—and cost a fortune. Xi Jinping’s China has taken to viewing America with distrust and scorn; Donald Trump’s America has pursued a policy of confrontation, notably over trade and intellectual property. Chinese technology is booming with the state’s help, as our Technology Quarterly reports, fuelling American unease. Mutual suspicion extends even to universities. Yet America Inc is still doing surprisingly well in China, despite trade tensions. Most American firms remain committed to China’s huge and growing market. Procter and Gamble says China represents over 30 of its sales growth; more Budweiser is swilled in China than in America. And last month Elon Musk’s Tesla—still well ahead of its Chinese rival, NIO—delivered the first electric cars made at its factory in Shanghai. One sign of Chinese technology companies’ global ambitions was the purchase, announced on December 31st, by Tencent, a Chinese digital giant, of a 10% stake in Universal Music Group from Vivendi, a French conglomerate. Remarkably, the implied value of UMG, €30bn ($34bn), is almost as much as Vivendi’s market capitalisation. The deal also illustrates the revival of the recorded music-industry in the past few years. Sales sagged from $23.9bn in 2001 to $14.3bn in 2014, a decline the industry blamed largely on piracy. But the internet is now the industry’s friend: thanks to streaming, sales have since climbed by 34%. New Year’s Day was the first anniversary of Jair Bolsonaro’s inauguration as president of Brazil. In 2019 the economy, which suffered its worst-ever recession in 2014-16, improved and violent crime has fallen. Mr Bolsonaro has pushed through pension reform, which has eluded Brazilian governments for decades. His economy minister says the president, who came to office having extolled the military dictatorship of 1964-85 and disparaging women and gays, has “bad manners, but great principles”. Yet as our leader argues, doubts about Mr Bolsonaro have not been put to rest. On corruption and the environment, Brazil is going backwards. Mr Bolsonaro has all but given up the fight against white-collar crime; and early figures suggest that deforestation in the Amazon rose by 80%, year-on-year, in the first 11 months of 2019. On January 13th Germany’s Greens celebrate their 40th birthday. What began as an eccentric band of environmentalists, peaceniks and anti-nuclear campaigners in Karlsruhe in 1970 is now the country’s second most popular party, behind Angela Merkel’s conservative Christian Democratic Union. The next federal election, due in the autumn of next year, will almost certainly restore the Greens to government, probably alongside the CDU and its Bavarian sibling, the Christian Social Union. (The Greens were in coalition with the centre-left Social Democrats from 1998 to 2005.) They are in office in 11 of Germany’s 16 states, with partners ranging from conservatives to ex-communists. State government is a good training ground—and has stoked the party’s appetite for power.