THE WALT DISNEY COMPANY trades in stories of transformation. “Cinderella” tells the tale of a maligned servant turned beloved princess. “Mulan” stars a young woman who becomes a fearsome warrior. “Beauty and the Beast” follows a selfish prince, cursed to take the form of a loathsome creature, who turns back into a (repentant) royal. Disney’s own story over the past decade has resembled a fairy-tale. In 2010 the firm claimed 14% of revenue from the North American box office, and became the first film studio to release two $1bn pictures—“Toy Story 3” and “Alice In Wonderland”—in a single year. By 2019 its share of the market had more than doubled, to 34%, according to Comscore, an analytics company (that figure rises to 38% when films made by 20th Century Fox, which Disney bought in March 2019, are included).  Last year the studio dominated the box office like a comic-book superhero. It was responsible for eight of the ten highest-grossing films of the year: “Avengers: Endgame”, “The Lion King”, “Frozen II”, “Spider-Man: Far From Home”, “Captain Marvel”, “Toy Story 4”, “Aladdin” and “Star Wars: The Rise of Skywalker”. Seven of them took in over $1bn worldwide (and “The Rise of Skywalker” is expected to reach that mark soon). All told, Disney raked in more than $10bn around the world, smashing the record of $7.6bn it set in 2016. And last year’s total excludes ticket sales for “Spider-Man: Far From Home” which was co-produced by Disney-owned Marvel and distributed by Sony. The company’s success owes less to its cinematic brilliance than to shrewd acquisitions. Marvel Studios, which Disney bought in 2009, has produced a string of enormously successful superhero films. “Avengers: Endgame”, released in April, earned a whopping $2.8bn worldwide, making it the highest-grossing film in history. Pixar, which Disney acquired in 2006, was responsible for “Toy Story 4”, the sixth-highest grossing picture last year. Lucasfilm, purchased in 2012, produced “The Rise of Skywalker”, the year’s ninth-ranked film. Since the $4.1bn acquisition from George Lucas, the “Star Wars” franchise has netted Disney nearly $5bn in ticket sales. Such eye-watering figures have no doubt caused consternation elsewhere in Hollywood. Warner Bros, Disney’s closest rival, captured just 14% of the North American market in 2019; some industry observers worry about a lack of competition. But 2019 was an unusually brilliant year for Disney. It is unlikely to scale such heights again soon. The releases due in 2020 include some significant titles—a live-action remake of “Mulan” and an adaptation of “Artemis Fowl”, a popular series of fantasy novels—but nothing with the clout of “The Lion King” or “Aladdin”. Still, as the 2010s drew to a close, the Disney kingdom may have been the happiest place on earth.