THE HOLLYWOOD FOREIGN PRESS ASSOCIATION picked some worthy winners at the Golden Globes on January 5th. No one could complain, for instance, about the selection of Bong Joon-Ho’s exhilarating dark farce, “Parasite”, as the Best Foreign-Language Film. But overall, the evening could have been mistaken for a grimly satirical parody of Hollywood awards ceremonies at their navel-gazing and backward-looking worst. Many fine films were ignored, while others were shoved into inappropriate categories; movies and shows about real-life legends of entertainment were everywhere. All things considered, the Golden Globes were less than golden. A list of eligible films which did not receive a single prize includes “The Irishman”, “Knives Out”, “Us”, “The Lighthouse”, “Jojo Rabbit”, “Little Women”, “Portrait of a Lady on Fire”, “Booksmart”, “Pain and Glory”, “Uncut Gems”, “Midsommar”, and “Hustlers”. In a kinder, saner parallel universe, many of them would have been honoured. The night was especially disappointing for fans of “The Irishman”, Martin Scorsese’s masterly three-and-a-half-hour return to the mob genre, and “Marriage Story”, Noah Baumbach’s forensic examination of a rancorous divorce. Both were tipped to triumph in multiple categories, but between them they won nothing but the Best Supporting Actress trophy (which went to Laura Dern for “Marriage Story”).  It was a disappointing night in general for Netflix, which funded both films when Hollywood’s established studios would not take the risk. The streaming service went into the awards as the dominant player: across the big- and small-screen categories, Netflix projects garnered 34 nominations. In a poor return, it came away with only two awards. HBO, by comparison, was nominated 15 times, but took home four statuettes. In place of “The Irishman” or “Marriage Story”, “1917”, Sir Sam Mendes’s tricksy first-world-war adventure, won Best Drama. Sir Sam also won Best Director, which bodes well for the film’s chances at the Oscars on February 9th. His win is a fair one: directing is partly a matter of logistics, and he contrives his heroes’ trek through France’s battlefields to appear as if it was captured in just two unbroken takes. It is a colossal feat of organisation. Still, how typical of the Golden Globes to laud a war movie which is technically impressive but politically conservative and even nostalgic. The same could be said of the evening’s other big winner, “Once Upon A Time... in Hollywood”. Quentin Tarantino’s sun-burnished ode to Tinseltown in the 1960s bagged three prizes: Best Musical or Comedy, Best Screenplay and Best Supporting Actor. (Aside from whether it merited those wins, what is undeniable is that Brad Pitt is not a supporting actor in the film, but a co-lead, and the film itself could just as easily have slotted into the drama category.) Mr Tarantino’s victory (pictured) exemplifies the Golden Globes’ narcissistic tendency to favour films about the trials and tribulations of show business. Indeed, Joaquin Phoenix was crowned Best Actor (drama) for playing Batman’s arch-enemy in “Joker”, reimagined in Todd Phillips’s origin myth as an aspiring stand-up comic who dreams of appearing on a talk show. The winner of Best Actor (musical or comedy) was Taron Egerton, who stars as Elton John in “Rocketman”. In case you are in doubt as to how uninspired a choice this was, Mr Egerton is the second actor in a row to win in this category for playing a British glam-rock icon in a biopic directed by Dexter Fletcher. Last year, Rami Malek won for playing Freddie Mercury in “Bohemian Rhapsody”, a film about the rock band Queen, which was finished by Mr Fletcher after the departure of its original director, Bryan Singer. Still, at least “Rocketman” was in the musical or comedy category, whereas Renée Zellweger was named Best Actress (drama) for playing Judy Garland in “Judy”. Only the Golden Globes would be perverse enough to have a musical category and then decide that “Judy” does not belong there, even though Ms Zellweger’s performance is notable for the numerous songs she belts out in the film’s recreations of Garland’s London cabarets. Her win was irritating in three ways: it was a sign of the awards’ category-muddling, its fixation on stories set in the entertainment industry and its over-rating of actors who play real people rather than fictional characters. These predilections were evident in the Golden Globes’ television categories, too, where Russell Crowe won for playing Roger Ailes, the late boss of Fox News, in “The Loudest Voice”, Michelle Williams won for playing Gwen Verdon, a Broadway dancer, in “Fosse / Verdon” and Olivia Colman picked up her inevitable gong for playing Queen Elizabeth II in “The Crown”. (Otherwise, the major winners in the television section were “Fleabag”, “Succession” and “Chernobyl”.) Awkwafina’s win for Best Actress (musical or comedy) for her understated work in “The Farewell” was a welcome decision, not least because she is the first actress with an Asian background to get the nod. But, again, the category is questionable. “The Farewell” is a comedy-drama, with its emphasis on the drama. Even when the Golden Globes make the right choice, they manage to get something wrong.