AS COVID-19 SPREAD around the globe, classrooms closed. Schools teaching more than 90% of the world’s pupils were shut. Children are getting back to school, especially in Europe and East Asia, but progress in many places is slow. In Kenya you can go to a bar, in Pakistan madrassas (religious schools) are open and in Bangladesh garment factories are back at work; but in all these countries mainstream schools remain closed. Among rich countries, America is a slowcoach. Although parents are understandably wary, the new coronavirus poses a low risk to children; and the costs of missing school are huge. That is true in the rich world, where poor children, many of whom were already behind their better-off peers, will suffer most. But in poor countries the damage may be truly vast. Online learning is unavailable, patchy or unaffordable. Many children are being forced into work. Girls out of school are at increased risk of being married off, falling pregnant or being sexually abused. And the economic costs are staggering: the World Bank estimates that five months of school closures could cost pupils $10trn in lifetime earnings. Donald Trump says that a vaccine against covid-19, or a drug to treat it, will be available this year. It is easy to be sceptical about anything America’s president says. But might he be right? His government is splurging $13bn on the pursuit. As well as backing vaccines and drugs, Operation Warp Speed is investing in diagnostic tests and antibody therapies, and, controversially, buying up drug supplies. Meanwhile, America is in the midst of an extraordinary surge in covid-19 cases, in marked contrast to other rich countries. Yet the death rate has remained flat, which may reflect more testing, the relative youth of those infected, better treatment or a statistical lag. It’s unlikely to stay that way. Some morgues in Arizona and Texas are already running out of room. Covid-19 has sent oil prices plummeting. Among Arab oil and gas producers, only Qatar can make its budget balance at the current price of around $40 a barrel. Mighty Saudi Arabia has cut an allowance for state workers and raised petrol prices and taxes—yet still faces a fiscal deficit of 16% of GDP this year. But even before the pandemic, the days of sky-high oil prices were numbered, as the world has begun to switch away from fossil fuels; and no region will be more deeply affected than the Middle East and north Africa. Many states have plans to wean themselves off oil, but even these are moving too slowly. Big Western oil companies, however, are already adjusting to the shift. They have long-term price forecasts and want to own only the cheapest, cleanest hydrocarbons. This week the British government said it would ban mobile-network operators from buying equipment from Huawei for their 5G networks by the end of the year. They must strip out the Chinese company’s kit completely by 2027. Donald Trump, who has been escalating his campaign against Huawei, arguing that it poses a security threat, claimed credit. American sanctions on Huawei left Britain with little choice; some countries had already barred the firm; Germany and others are weighing whether to follow suit. The economic cost of cutting out Huawei is tolerable. Other suppliers, led by Ericsson and Nokia, will raise production. But the true damage lies in the decay of the world’s trading system. Although the West mistrusts China, it still has to find a way of doing business with it. On July 10th MOSE, a barrier to protect Venice from sea surges, was tested in its entirety for the first time. The project is nine years behind schedule, three times over budget and may not be wholly reliable, or affordable, when fully functional at the end of 2021. Even if MOSE (Moses in Italian) can tame the Adriatic, the city will not be safe. Everyday water levels are rising, eating at its fabric. The causes are global warming and a loss of salt marshes that used to absorb seawater. Banning big ships from the lagoon would help. But the solution may be to raise the city by pumping seawater into aquifers beneath it. The estimated cost? Much less than MOSE.