AT THE beginning of spring much of Europe shut down to slow the spread of covid-19, which has infected nearly 3m people and taken the lives of about 200,000 in the continent’s 54 countries and territories, from the Atlantic to the Urals. The first wave of infections appears largely to have abated. Countries are returning to some semblance of normality—albeit with social-distancing measures in place. Now that governments are loosening restrictions on their citizens, the fear is that the virus could return. To assess how European countries are coping, and to monitor the danger of “second waves”, The Economist has assembled data on covid-19 cases and deaths for 39 countries, and for 173 sub-national areas for which data are available (see map above). We present the total number of deaths per 100,000 in the population. We also break down the infection and death rates for the past seven days to give a better sense of whether the virus is most active. A different way of visualising these data is below, in the time-series for deaths and infections for 16 selected European countries. To facilitate country-by-country comparisons, we have smoothed both variables using a seven-day moving average and indexed them so that each curve peaks at 100. The resulting charts show that most countries saw infections and deaths rise sharply to a peak in April, followed by a slower descent in both measures. Sweden is a notable exception. It did not lock down as tightly as neighbouring countries did; infections continue to rise. Until a vaccine is available, countries will have to remain vigilant to control the virus. Localised outbreaks are inevitable: in June, for example, infections spread at meat-processing plants in Britain, France, Germany and Spain. Leicester, a British city of around 330,000 people, was placed under the country’s first local lockdown on June 30th. If these outbreaks become large enough they will show up in the regional data. In the charts below, we use the same presentation format as the ones above for 12 selected sub-national areas in Europe. The shape of these curves follow a very similar pattern to the national ones, yet some regions, notably Lisbon in Portugal, North Rhine-Westphalia in Germany and especially Stockholm in Sweden, show a recent resurgence of cases. The table below presents the complete data for deaths and cases over the past week for each of the countries and regions that we are tracking. (You can sort each column by clicking on its header.) The Economist will update these figures regularly as Europe enters a new phase of the pandemic. As ever, some caution is required when interpreting these statistics. Differences between covid-19 testing regimes and the way that deaths are counted means it is difficult to make direct comparisons between one country’s statistics and another’s. For an all-encompassing measure, see our excess-death mortality data, which compares overall deaths rates in each country with the historical average. However these data are often incomplete and are released with a delay of several weeks or more. Subnational data thus provide useful and timely information on the progress of the pandemic. ■ To keep up with our coverage of the pandemic, visit our coronavirus hub. Some of our covid-19 coverage is free for readers of The Economist Today , our daily newsletter. Sources: Eurostat; Johns Hopkins University CSSE; UN; Blavatnik School of Government, University of Oxford; national statistical and health agencies; The Economist