ANYONE WHO saw “Flash Gordon” at an impressionable age in 1980 will remember the bombastic theme song by Queen and Brian Blessed’s career-defining cry of “Gordon’s alive?!” But the scene which may be seared most deeply into the memory is the one in which the noble hero, Flash (Sam Jones), has been rescued by Princess Aura (Ornella Muti), the seductive, scheming daughter of Ming the Merciless (Max Von Sydow). Flash’s love interest, Dale Arden (Melody Anderson), is locked in Ming’s boudoir, but as Flash and Aura fly away to another planet, he uses a “thought amplifier” to have a telepathic conversation with her. The snag is that the Princess is kissing and caressing him at the time, and Flash can’t help sending Dale an embarrassing psychic message: “Oh my God, this girl’s really turning me on!” Audiences who had paid to see a “Star Wars”-style children’s adventure got more than they bargained for. Forty years on, the risqué content seems even more audacious than it did in 1980. The film’s director, Mike Hodges, was most famous for his glum revenge thriller, “Get Carter” (1971), but when he was adapting “Flash Gordon” from its source material, a comic strip published in the 1930s and a subsequent Saturday matinee film serial, he went in a completely different direction. His camp, colourful and suggestive space opera was a knowing riposte to the earnest myth-making of George Lucas’s unofficial “Flash Gordon” homage, “Star Wars”. The story, as scripted by Lorenzo Semple junior, has less to do with ruling the galaxy than it has with Ming fancying Dale, and Princess Aura fancying Flash, and everyone fancying Princess Aura. There is a harem, a love potion, a hypnotic ray which prompts Dale to writhe orgasmically and a selection of the most revealing outfits this side of an Olympic beach volleyball team. When Flash is due to be executed by Ming, he wears leather hot pants for the occasion, and the name “Flash” comes dangerously close to having another meaning. Princess Aura sports a gold bikini three years before Princess Leia wore one in “Return of the Jedi”. You don’t need a thought amplifier to work out why Mr Hodges’s film has built a cult following. One reason why he got away with such provocative imagery is that “Flash Gordon” was produced by Dino De Laurentiis, an Italian movie mogul who didn’t answer to a particular Hollywood studio. But Mr Hodges maintains that he was simply being faithful to the original comic strips. As drawn by Alex Raymond, these were packed with scantily dressed men and women submitting to various galactic tyrants: Mr Raymond was shrewd enough to know that it wasn’t just the giant monsters and flying saucers that attracted his readership. Nor was he unique. William Moulton Marston’s early “Wonder Woman” comics in the 1940s were informed by his own enthusiasm for bondage (which is why Wonder Woman carries a lasso). Most science-fiction and superhero comics aren’t quite so blatant about their kinks, but they have always been populated by gods and goddesses in skin-tight costumes, whether or not they are practical crime-fighting attire. Films adapted from such comics tend to play down their eroticism. There are exceptions, such as the raunchy, 15-rated “Deadpool”, but from a marketing perspective, selling mega-budget films to be watched in crowded cinemas is different from selling pulp magazines to be pored over in adolescent boys’ bedrooms. Catering for conservative mass audiences is essential. Now that the “Star Wars” and Marvel franchises are owned by Disney, producers are more cautious than ever in this regard. Romance between the characters is kept to a chaste and child-friendly minimum, and the titillation is confined to brief topless shots of Chris Hemsworth, Chris Pratt, Paul Rudd or whichever other male actor has spent weeks in the gym in preparation for the role. In 1980 Mr Hodges and Laurentiis were more honest about superheroes’ sex appeal. As tongue-in-cheek as their film may be, it honours Raymond’s comic strips by refusing to ignore their salacious side. Perhaps it is fortunate that so few blockbusters followed its example. If the “Flash Gordon” approach had taken off, family trips to the cinema might have been more fun, but the conversations on the way home would have been a lot more awkward. “Flash Gordon: 40th Anniversary 4K Restoration” will be released in British cinemas on July 31st