BORN IN 1941, Bernardo Bertolucci grew up amid the cultural renaissance of post-war Italy. The years of fascist rule were over; in cinema neorealism became eminent, while Italian chic was taking over the world of fashion. Bernardo’s father, Attilio Bertolucci, was a famous poet and film critic; Bernardo began writing aged 15 with a view to pursuing a career in poetry. It was at the University of Rome—and thanks to Attilio’s connections—that he was introduced to film-making. He worked as an assistant to Pier Paolo Pasolini, a neorealist director, and made his first film at 22. By 1970, and not yet 30, he had made five movies and collaborated with some of Italy’s most acclaimed auteurs. It was in 1970 that Bertolucci would release his masterpiece. He counted among his friends Alberto Moravia, a novelist who had been so critical of Benito Mussolini’s regime that his books had been censored and he had been forced to write under a pseudonym. In 1951 Moravia had published “The Conformist”, a postmortem of fascism steeped in the same existential dread as Albert Camus’s “The Outsider” (1942). Bertolucci’s adaptation of “The Conformist”, which had its premiere 50 years ago on July 1st 1970, catapulted him to international fame. The conformist of the title, Marcello Clerici (Jean-Louis Trintignant), longs to lead what he considers a “normal life”. In Rome in 1936, normality means joining the National Fascist Party, and Marcello uses his friendship with a right-wing intellectual to get a job interview at the secret police. The colonel who assesses Marcello considers him an enigma, motivated neither by ideology nor by money, yet accepts him to the force anyway. Indeed, Marcello seems willing to assume any intellectual posture. He goes to confession at the behest of Giulia (Stefania Sandrelli), his socialite fiancée, despite the fact that he is not a believer. His apparent embrace of Catholicism—much like his marriage and his fascism—is part of his pursuit of normality. Marcello’s honeymoon provides the cover for his first mission as a thug for the Organisation for Vigilance and Repression of Anti-Fascism. The newlyweds set off for Paris, where he is to make contact with his old university tutor, Professor Quadri (Enzo Tarascio), whom the fascists want dead because of his vocal opposition to the regime. In Bertolucci’s non-linear narrative, the film begins in Paris on the morning of the assassination attempt as Marcello and an associate pursue Quadri and his wife, Anna (Dominique Sanda), through the snowy French countryside. From there, the film jumps backwards and forwards in time, and flashbacks grasp at the mystery of what drives Marcello. Perhaps his need for normality is rooted in the dysfunction of his own upper-class family, given that his father is in an insane asylum and his mother is a morphine addict. Perhaps it is a result of a traumatic event in his childhood: the film suggests that Marcello was the victim of sexual abuse, but it is unclear what exactly took place and whether the young boy did kill his abuser in self-defence. Throughout, the protagonist remains a slippery subject. Marcello readily admits that he doesn’t love Giulia and, once in Paris for their honeymoon, embarks on an affair with Anna, who in turn is intent on seducing Giulia herself. The only constant is Marcello’s indecision about whether he will go through with the murder. When given a gun, he strikes a series of poses, but later admits he doesn’t even know how to use it. His attitude is one of ironic detachment. His fascist salute seems like a provocative joke. The film itself maintains an ironic detachment and there is a dissonance between the bitterness of the story and its cinematic beauty. The lush score is by Georges Delerue, who also provided the music for Jean-Luc Godard’s “Le Mépris” (1963), another adaptation of Moravia’s work. Vittorio Storaro’s cinematography is stunning: he uses a bright palette of golds and blues to evoke Paris, contrasting it with the shadowy greys of fascist Rome. The film’s aesthetic is influenced by American gangster movies, as well as by the so-called Telefoni Bianchi (“white telephone”) films of the fascist period, with impeccable period design and decadent villas. The colours, the way the camera moves and the editing all highlight that this is a production which, like Marcello, is well aware of its own posturing. “The Conformist” would become a major influence on the “New Cinema” movement of the 1970s and early 1980s and on later artists. Francis Ford Coppola recruited Storaro to shoot “The Godfather Part II” and “Apocalypse Now”, while the Coen Brothers used Bertolucci’s film as a visual template for their debut feature, “Blood Simple”. An alienated and unreliable antihero was a crucial part of Martin Scorsese’s “Taxi Driver”. An episode of “The Sopranos”, called “Pine Barrens”, is an extended homage to “The Conformist”. Bertolucci’s work is chillingly relevant in 2020, too, given the recent rise of nationalist extremism. Despite its ambiguities “The Conformist” is uncompromising in its condemnation of Marcello: it suggests that his narcissistic nihilism is worse than fascism, even as it facilitates it. In the end, there is little difference between playing at being a fascist and being one.