AS PART OF his "phase one trade deal" with China, signed in January, President Donald Trump secured promises that the Chinese would buy a lot of American stuff. The data so far suggest that sales are falling short. According to figures compiled by Chad Bown of the Peterson Institute for International Economics (with whom your correspondent hosts a podcast), over the first five months of the year Chinese imports of goods covered by the agreement were badly behind schedule. Compared with a baseline assuming the exports would be spread evenly through the year, purchases were less than half of what they should have been. Performance varies by category. China has imported less than $1bn-worth of American energy products (chiefly oil, coal and liquefied natural gas), compared with the $25bn promised for the whole year. (Some in America are anyway sceptical about the industry’s capacity to supply such an amount.) Chinese imports of manufactured goods are less than a quarter of their way to the annual target, with five months of the year gone. Mr Trump was particularly proud of China’s promises to buy agricultural products. But so far only $8bn out of $37bn has materialised. These figures might suggest that the Chinese are playing Mr Trump and his negotiators for fools. At the moment it seems likely that the president will lose November’s election. Perhaps they are judging that a President Joe Biden would not care so much about enforcing political sops to farmers. By the time data on whether they met the targets are made public, Mr Trump could be long gone. But the Chinese also have had a pandemic to contend with, which has dampened economic activity. Their total imports in the first five months of the year were 13% lower than in the same period in 2019. And their promises were based on the year as a whole, so there is still time for their purchases to surge. For now, both sides are marking time. There are no signs of further negotiations and no serious talks are likely until after the election. Meanwhile, American trade officials are insisting that the deal is still intact. In a recent congressional hearing Robert Lighthizer, the deal’s American negotiator, called Mr Bown’s attempts at comparing promises with published data "childish", and maintained that China was keeping its promises. In the months to come, however, expect both the administration and trade analysts to keep watching the numbers closely.