KATE CLANCHY, a British teacher, poet and writer, did not intend her Twitter account to become a record of the country’s coronavirus lockdown. Over the past three months she has published poems that capture the anxiety and tedium, loss and longing, unexpected joys and fears of lives placed on indefinite pause. Almost all have been written by Ms Clanchy’s former students, now aged between 16 and 24, during twice-weekly Zoom meetings. Their work has resonated with thousands of readers online. Ms Clanchy (pictured) taught poetry at Oxford Spires Academy, a state school in a poor suburb of the city, for ten years before leaving last summer. “I’ve always stayed in touch with my former students…but then suddenly they were all in touch at the same time and they were all sending me poems,” she says. She decided to organise sessions to allow them to write together. Over the past three months they have produced dozens of poems reflecting on life in lockdown, which Ms Clanchy is in the process of compiling into a collection entitled “Unmute”. Many reflect on the tedium and claustrophobia of self-isolation. “On the first day/the novelty in any school/was raw. Freedom/hung high above us like jungle vines,” writes Eva Brand Whitehead, a 16-year-old, in her poem “Locked Out”. “Now freedom grates harsh as a cog./The dishwasher is in a childish fit/The kitchen is bored/The Wifi plays Jenga.” For 17-year-old Linnet Drury, lockdown is a cycle of eating and gardening, of naming and renaming all the houseplants. “I’ve often been told I shovel/my food, like I might never eat again,/but when we’re stuck at home/we cling to meals as punctuation.” In another poem, Miss Drury considers the new vocabulary of the coronavirus. “I mouth the new words of our language, interpret/their taste: furlough gathers dust, second wave is/a sea storm, the r-number stands for revenge number.” Other contributors describe the unexpected things they miss, from a shrunken school jumper to cycling home at dusk. Annie Davison, aged 17, longs for “a moonlight walk to the corner/shop along double yellowed/streets to buy two Fantas and a packet/of salt and vinegar crisps”. Amaani Khan, also 17, wishes she could have “collected handfuls of sunshine” for her mother who was shielding from the virus and prohibited from going outside. Ms Clanchy says that the lockdown has been particularly hard on teenagers and young adults, many of whom are stuck at home with their families. But the poems have resonated with readers of all ages who found in them an echo of their own experiences, from the language of Zoom meetings and “the strangling queues around shops” to the quandary of unruly hair, described by 17-year-old Naomi Ray in the poem “Blonde”: “Eventually I saw no point in hiding it,/It hides me instead. I scrape it back/and it sits on top of me like a clenched fist.” Many of their poems also touch on the Black Lives Matter movement and personal experiences of racism, identity and displacement. Shukria Rezaei, who moved to Britain from Afghanistan aged 14 and is now 21, wrote a moving poem inspired by the massacre in a maternity ward in Kabul on March 12th. “I can’t breathe”, a poem by Amineh Abou Kerech, a 16-year-old Syrian refugee, about the killing of George Floyd, went viral during the protests in America in early June. “I can’t breathe, I can’t believe./A man died quietly, like silk,/and slept under the killer’s knee,” she wrote. When she arrived in the UK five years ago, Ms Kerech spoke no English, reflecting the diversity of Oxford Spires Academy, where the pupils speak around 34 languages. Many of them are refugees or the children of first-generation migrants. Ms Clanchy says they pick up sounds “in ways that are too subtle to describe” and excel at adapting them into new patterns. “If there’s a kind otherness or extra listening that goes on then you can often find a poet in that,” she says, adding that others in the group are dyslexic or have suffered from periods of deafness. She reckons that anyone can write good poems with consistent support and encouragement. Her book, “Some Kids I Taught and What They Taught Me”, published in April and shortlisted for the Orwell Prize, is a moving reflection on two decades of teaching, the challenges faced by her students and the ways they have learned to navigate the world. “They constantly refine my expectations of what people can be and what they understand,” she says, adding that white, middle-class people tend to see themselves as “the omniscient narrator on the world”. The recent poems she has shared anticipate the end of lockdown. Mukahang Limbu, a 19-year-old student (pictured), writes: “When all this is over, and the bedroomsgo out of business, I mean to pay betterattention to daffodils, to let them remind meof rifle rounds of laughter…I mean to stay young for at least a single day.”