THIS WEEK an American pharmaceutical company, Regeneron, announced that it had a new drug for covid-19 entering late-stage clinical trials. This is one of several therapies designed around giving patients “neutralising antibodies” that are now seen as promising prospects for treating covid-19, as well as for preventing infection in the first place. The treatments are being pursued by a number of other big pharma firms, including GSK, Eli Lilly, AstraZeneca and Amgen. The question of whether neutralising antibodies work against covid-19 may be answered over the summer. Although many drugs have already been tested for treating covid-19, these have been designed specifically to fight this disease. Other putative treatments that have been tested so far involved different therapeutical strategies and were first made for other purposes, such as combating malaria or HIV. The idea behind neutralising-antibody therapies is that they mimic the body’s own response to covid-19. Over time the body creates antibodies when it encounters a foreign virus such as SARS-CoV-2. The proteins are created over a period of weeks and help the body neutralise the virus. For some patients this natural antibody response is too slow and the virus runs riot in the body, making the patient unwell. The pharmaceutical approach is to manufacture the antibodies from scratch and then give them directly to patients. In theory, if these pre-made antibodies are given to people with covid-19, they should latch on to the virus and prevent it from binding to cells and infecting them. This should slow the progression of the disease. It may also be possible to give the antibodies to those at high risk in order to prevent infection—although protection would not be expected to last more than a few months. The trial announced this week will examine whether the Regeneron treatment can prevent infection. Although failure rates in the development of new drugs are notoriously high, there are a number of reasons for optimism over neutralising antibodies. One is that the basic science behind antibody transfer is well understood. For example, immunity is transferred from mothers to their offspring by the transfer of antibodies through the placenta, and during breastfeeding. Neutralising antibodies were also successfully developed to treat Ebola: in a trial, 67% of patients who received a cocktail of antibodies from Regeneron were alive after a month, compared with 49% who did not. Eli Lilly has said that if testing goes well with either of its two antibodies they could be authorised for use as early as September. Regeneron has said that it could have data by the end of the summer that would allow regulators to consider the broad use of its treatment. The firm has also cleared the way for the production of antibodies at its New York manufacturing facility. That is unlikely to bring comfort in the short term to those outside the United States. The American government was recently able to buy up most of the next three months’ supply of a drug called remdesivir (made by another firm, Gilead); on July 7th it signed a deal with Regeneron to supply hundreds of thousands of doses of its experimental antibody therapy. If an effective neutralising-antibody therapy could be supplied in quantities that start to meet international demand, the potential would be enormous. Administered early enough in the course of the disease, it would save lives and prevent hospitalisation. If covid-19 were more treatable, governments would not need to shut down their societies to such an extent. Antibody therapies, though, are a complement to rather than a replacement for vaccination (which stimulates the body’s own production of antibodies). That will be the world’s ultimate long-term escape from covid-19. But the global deployment of a covid-19 vaccine is a challenge unlike any other in the history of vaccination, and in any case vaccines never provide complete protection. For the foreseeable future people will continue to fall ill with covid-19. And without an effective treatment, it will continue to kill.