SUMMER MARKS the peak wildfire season in western America. Warmer temperatures and drier conditions create the perfect environment for flames to ravage plains and forests. Long nights of fireworks and toasting s’mores over campfires do not help either. On July 4th alone California’s firefighters reported 67 blazes. The state has seen 5,000 more wildfires in 2020 than by this time last year. Troublingly, wildfires appear to be becoming more common across America (see chart). A new working paper by researchers at the University of California, San Diego, and Stanford University finds that the area burned by wildfires in America has almost quadrupled in the past 40 years. The authors reach this conclusion by matching data from several sources: information on vegetation density from the National Land Cover Dataset; air-quality figures gathered from ground monitors; and wildfire statistics from the National Interagency Fire Center. Almost 50m homes in America now border wildland, the authors found, using housing numbers from Core-Logic, a financial-data provider. A further 1m are added every three years. Many of these residences are in areas with arid climates, which are wildfire hotspots. Not only has the number of homes at risk increased, but climate change has heightened the dangers of living in such areas. Federal spending for wildfire protection and prevention has also increased dramatically. In 2014, the Department of the Interior and the Department of Agriculture spent $1.5 bn in wildfire suppression costs. Now, that number is more than $3.1bn. Wildfires also harm people’s long-term health, since they emit smoke in the air. There are more than 60 days a year now in which smoke is reported in the air in the north-west, compared with around 35 in the mid-2000s.Around a quarter of America’s PM2.5 particles (fine dust that is at most 2.5 microns in diameter) are attributable to wildfires. In some western regions, wildfires account for closer to half, putting people at greater risk of lung disease. For many Americans this summer, living through a pandemic is not the only danger to their health.