“NARRATIVES CAN make us understand. Photographs do something else: they haunt us,” Susan Sontag wrote in “Regarding the Pain of Others”. Stories and images play different roles in humans’ ability to comprehend the experiences of others, Sontag reckoned: stories explain a situation but photographs parachute an individual into it, if only for a moment, and persist in the memory. The combination of both is the basic goal of the documentary film-maker, who aims to leave the viewer both educated and emotionally invested in their subject. The need for coherent narratives and affecting imagery is a problem for documentaries if participation in them is dangerous. In order for the audience to truly empathise with the characters, they have to see them. This means that the individual must ideally appear in full, broadcasting their appearance along with their story, which opens them up to a slew of consequences, including reprisals from those who would rather they stay silent. Or they can be hidden and thus protected. But obscuring identities behind silhouettes or pixelation also shuts down a crucial conduit for feeling. “Welcome to Chechnya” skilfully navigates this trade-off between risk and reward. Using artificial intelligence and visual effects David France, the director, gives his subjects new faces entirely. Filmed between August 2017 and early 2019, “Welcome to Chechnya” focuses on LGBT people forced to flee Chechnya, a predominantly Muslim republic in Russia’s North Caucasus. Chechnya’s leader—an erratic and brutal strongman named Ramzan Kadyrov—enjoys broad autonomy in return for fealty to the Russian president, Vladimir Putin. Under Mr Kadyrov, Chechnya has become increasingly conservative, cracking down on citizens who drink, do drugs or have extramarital sex. The worst treatment is reserved for homosexuals. Since at least 2017 gay Chechens have reported being arrested and tortured, forced to give up the names of other homosexual men and, often, murdered. Lesbians face “honour killings” at home (though this is less frequently mentioned in the media). According to Human Rights Watch, the persecution of queer Chechens amounts to a state-sponsored attempt to “purge them from Chechen society”. With the Russian government refusing to step in—the Kremlin both supports Mr Kadyrov’s denials of human-rights abuses in Chechnya and encourages “traditional family values” that exclude homosexuality—helping LGBT people in Chechnya has fallen to activists, mostly working from Moscow. With no prior experience, these groups began extracting victims from Chechnya, placing them in secret shelters and organising visas and flights for them to claim asylum in other countries. Mr France (“How to Survive a Plague”, 2012; “The Death and Life of Marsha P. Johnson”, 2017) embedded himself with these activists as they tried to ferry the Chechens towards a new life and tentative safety. For most of those fleeing, anonymity is a matter of life or death. In order to preserve it, the documentary team tried a variety of post-production techniques, including illustration, before settling on imposing entirely new faces on top of subjects’ own. This process, known as “deepfakes”, is normally reserved for internet mischief, such as making politicians and celebrities appear to say things they didn’t. In this case, Ryan Laney, the film’s visual-effects supervisor, filmed the faces of volunteers in New York and used machine learning so that their emotions and movements would mirror those of the Chechens. Without this slight of hand, the film’s most memorable sequences—including a scene in which a man explains how he was tortured, while his partner silently strokes the site of his wounds; and another in which a young lesbian, desperate to escape, is held up by a Chechen airport official—would have been stripped of much of their power. So too would the film’s terrifying intercut footage, in which intercepted videos show LGBT individuals being attacked, raped and killed. “I wanted to see their humanity,” Mr France has said. “But I promised them I would find some solution that would allow them to invite us on their journey without revealing who they were.” He did, and the viewer is left haunted by the horror of the subjects’ situation while able to feel something of their terror and fragile hope. The face-swapping also achieves something close to a meditation on the meaning and limits of anonymity. The replacements are deliberately noticeable: the production team added in a “halo”, a soft blur around the replaced faces intended as a tell. By drawing the audience’s attention to the fact that they are viewing something unreal, the film-makers hammer home just how vulnerable these individuals are. It highlights an awful Catch-22—in order to seek justice and file criminal complaints, victims must forgo the anonymity keeping them safe. Activists have long been trying to find someone willing to go public against Chechnya’s government. At the film’s climax, one man, Maxim Lapunov, finally does so. As he holds a press conference, his digital mask dissolves to reveal his actual face. The effect is startling, reminding viewers of the exposure involved in coming forward. At the time of writing, that exposure has not yet been rewarded: Chechnya’s treatment of its LGBT population continues unopposed. “Welcome to Chechnya” is available via HBO in America and via BBC Storyville in Britain