IN THE wee hours after Singapore’s general election on July 10th hundreds of supporters of the Workers’ Party (WP), the main opposition outfit, streamed onto the streets to celebrate their party’s showing, in defiance of the city-state’s strict social-distancing rules. One would have been forgiven for thinking that the WP had won the election. In fact it took a trifling ten seats out of 93. But in Singapore, which has been ruled by the People’s Action Party (PAP) since independence in 1965, this was the best performance by an opposition party ever in terms of seats won, and the worst by the PAP. The ruling party’s share of the vote sank from almost 70% at the previous election, in 2015, to 61%. It should have been easy for Singaporeans to decide whom to vote for. The PAP has plenty to boast about: a GDP per person greater than America’s, one of the world’s best education systems and an array of sleek, air-conditioned malls in which to sip bubble tea. The PAP offers other enticements, too. It regularly says it will spruce up civic amenities and the public-housing estates in which 80% of Singaporeans live—in constituencies that vote for it. In 2006 Goh Chok Tong, a former prime minister, promised Hougang, in the north-east, S$100m ($63m at the time) to refurbish public housing if residents re-elected the PAP candidate. In one by-election the PAP candidate pledged S$1.9m for covered walkways, ramps and a park. This time would-be MPs promised to improve lifts in housing estates and to boost the internet—although the government also says it no longer favours PAP districts for housing upgrades. Voters not tempted by the PAP’s carrots have been threatened with sticks instead. In 2006 Mr Goh warned Hougang’s residents that if they didn’t vote for the PAP their area would become a “slum”. In 2011, when Lee Kuan Yew, the founding father of Singapore and the PAP, was asked about the prospect of the Aljunied area picking the opposition Workers’ Party (WP), he thundered: “If Aljunied decides to go that way, well, Aljunied has five years to live and repent.” Aljunied did go that way, to its cost. Town councils, which MPs manage, are funded by government subsidies, fees paid by locals who live in public housing and grants that must be applied for from the Community Improvement Projects Committee (CIPC), a government panel. Between 2009 and 2011, when the town council in Aljunied was in PAP hands, it got S$12m from CIPC, says Pritam Singh, a WP MP. Between 2012 and 2018, when his party ran Aljunied, he complains, it received just S$680,000. In districts that spurn the PAP, the failed candidate nonetheless presides over naturalisation ceremonies, cuts the ribbon at new bus stops and hosts “Meet the People” sessions, which in other constituencies would normally be a chance for residents to petition their MP for help. This is because in opposition districts the losing PAP candidate is invariably appointed a “grassroots adviser” by the People’s Association (PA), a body chaired by the prime minister. It is a position that comes with much responsibility; winning PAP candidates are appointed to it too. (The PA says the political affiliation of prospective advisers is not a consideration, just the extent to which they are “aligned” with the government’s ideas.) These advisers run residents’ committees, community clubs and, in opposition wards, decide whether MPs’ proposals for a new playground or jogging track merit consideration by the CIPC. Deen, a shopkeeper in Aljunied, likes Mr Singh, his MP, who is from the WP and often drops by for a chat. But for any sort of practical assistance, he says, “I go talk to the PAP.” So why do Singaporeans ever bother to vote for the opposition? Although this week’s tally was especially high, about a third of the electorate has rejected the PAP at every election for decades. Most Singaporeans believe in checks and balances, says Eugene Tan, a law professor and former independent MP. Many voters view the PAP as arrogant and elitist, and complain about immigration, public housing and the cost of living, notes Netina Tan of McMaster University in Canada. The WP, the ablest opposition outfit, has seized on such grievances. In 2011 it managed to wrest control of Aljunied “group representation constituency” (GRC) from the PAP. GRCs are super-sized constituencies represented by a slate of three to six MPs, all belonging to the party that gets the most votes. Because parties must field multiple candidates, they are costly for the opposition to contest and still harder to win. Aljunied was the first ever captured by the opposition—a “stunning” loss for the PAP, says Kenneth Paul Tan of the National University of Singapore. It was more than a protest vote. Residents felt that the incumbent PAP MPs “weren’t there for them,” says Chong Ja Ian of National University of Singapore. Low Thia Khiang, then the WP’s leader, put in the hours, attending funerals and weddings, and charming the area’s many ethnic Teochew Chinese by speaking to them in their native tongue. In 2015 the WP clung to the seat by a hair. This time pundits thought that voters, worried by covid-19, might cleave more faithfully than normal to the devil they know. Aljunied’s fate was uncertain. Mr Low had retired. Mr Singh, his successor, although assiduous, does not speak Teochew. Yet the WP won Aljunied with 60% of the vote. It also held on to Hougang, a single-member seat and the WP’s first stronghold, with 61%. And it won a new GRC in Sengkang with 52%. The disciplined WP has managed to avoid the acrimonious in-fighting that has bedevilled other opposition parties undergoing a transition in leadership, notes Hoe Yeong Loke, author of “The First Wave”, a history of Singaporean opposition parties. The WP also proudly portrays its voters as “torchbearers of democracy in Singapore,” says Gillian Koh of the Institute of Policy Studies. The residents of Aljunied and Hougang wear their support for the WP as a “badge of honour”, says Eugene Tan. That kind of loyalty, he reckons, cannot be easily bought.