WHAT IF EVERY day was the same? What if you woke up each morning in the exact same place as you did the day before, and every moment that followed was as painfully predictable as the last? Would anything matter? For the millions of people around the world sheltering in place due to the covid-19 pandemic, stuck in their homes with the same people, these are questions that have become more urgent. They are also the basis for a genre of film that is suddenly more relevant than ever. “Groundhog Day”, the most famous movie of this kind, features Bill Murray as an egomaniacal weatherman whose cosmic predicament in a small Pennsylvania town is played for laughs. It was a minor hit upon its release in 1993, but it has grown in esteem ever since: in 2017 the film was voted the fourth-best comedy of all time in a BBC poll. The next generation of film-makers has used the same time-loop premise in other ways. “Edge of Tomorrow” (2014) turned it into an action/sci-fi spectacle with a military PR hack (Tom Cruise) using his predicament to evolve from a snivelling coward to a supersoldier who wins a global war against alien invaders. In “Happy Death Day” (2017) a student (Jessica Rothe) experiences the day of her murder over and over again, only escaping the loop when she uncovers the killer. “Palm Springs”, the latest iteration, has more modest goals. (Though not a modest price tag: Hulu, a streaming service, and Neon, a distributor, paid nearly $22m for it in the biggest deal ever made at the Sundance film festival.) The movie stars Andy Samberg as Nyles, a slacker who, due to mysterious circumstances involving a glowing cave in the desert, is stuck living a pretty terrible day. He is in Palm Springs, a hip desert town outside Los Angeles, for a wedding at which he doesn’t know anyone except his shallow, cheating girlfriend. Many days into his ordeal—but on the first day shown in the film—he befriends the maid of honour, Sarah (Cristin Milioti) and accidentally drags her into his repetitive nightmare. Inevitably these two people overcome their initial friction—Sarah is understandably miffed at Nyles ruining her life—and fall in love. “Palm Springs” is at its best when the couple are embracing the spontaneity that their situation affords. Other films have ventured down this avenue: “Groundhog Day” featured a memorable sequence in which its protagonist gorges on pastries and convinces a good-looking stranger to go to bed with him. But “Palm Springs” has a more innocent sensibility. For their fun, Nyles and Sarah steal a single-engine plane, and actually get it off the ground, before crashing spectacularly. They stage a prank at the wedding. In the film’s most gleeful sequence, they burst into a dive bar and enact a choreographed dance routine for a group of bewildered boozers. It is infectiously endearing. Mr Samberg has honed this kind of offbeat humour with his longtime comedy trio, The Lonely Island (the other members, Akiva Schaffer and Jorma Taccone, are producers of the film). They rose to fame for their zany sketches on “Saturday Night Live” but their first attempt at a feature film, “Popstar: Never Stop Never Stopping” (2016), failed to find much of an audience at the box office. Absurdist comedy rarely appeals to mainstream viewers, but this film wisely balances the eccentric elements with the conventions of the romantic comedy. What is surprising is how familiar “Palm Springs” feels even with its supernatural trappings. Mr Samberg and Ms Milioti produce natural and empathetic performances, but both Nyles and Sarah are archetypes. Nyles, a smart alec with a tender heart, is afraid of real commitment, while Sarah’s romantic troubles have made her a black sheep in her family. There is not much character growth. Time-loop films are inherently philosophical, and they work best when they have something new to say about life, relationships or human nature. “Palm Springs” may fail this test, but it is still an enjoyable way to spend a day in purgatory. “Palm Springs” is available to stream on Hulu from July 10th