WHEN COVID-19 struck Lombardy, the Italian government was quick to lock down large swathes of the economy—first in the region, and then across the entire country. Lacking a vaccine, many other rich countries have adopted similar measures to slow the spread of the disease. Although these measures have helped contain the virus in Europe and East Asia, developing countries remain exposed. Covid-19 is proliferating across Latin America, South Asia and Africa. Given that poorer countries cannot afford to lock down their economies for very long, just how much damage will covid-19 do? A new index from the Surgo Foundation, a non-profit firm, offers a glimpse of what the answer might be for countries in Africa. The researchers have built a model which takes into account a number of socioeconomic and demographic factors to work out which parts of the continent Africa will suffer most if the pandemic takes hold. These include the age and density of populations, political fragility and the quality of health systems. Their data indicate that health risks will be fairly evenly spread across countries. Richer states such as South Africa and Egypt have much better health-care systems than say, Mali and Niger, but also have older populations. Different areas are in danger for different reasons. Four of Africa’s ten most vulnerable regions are in the Democratic Republic of Congo, in large part owing to the country’s political instability. The slums of Ethiopia in contrast, though more stable, leave residents little room for social distancing. Troublingly, of the 16 countries for which there are reliable data, the Surgo Foundation finds that mobility—and hence the chance of infected people spreading the coronavirus—has fallen at a slower rate in the more vulnerable regions. The foundation’s research offers a silver lining of sorts. Its model estimates that Africa’s covid-19 infection fatality rate (IFR), ie, the share of people who would die if they were infected with the disease as opposed to officially diagnosed, falls somewhere between 0.1% and 0.15%. America’s IFR, in comparison, has been estimated at around five times as high. But caution is in order. Research by the Center for Global Development, another non-profit organisation, paints a less rosy view. They estimate that Africa’s covid-19 IFR to be much closer to that of rich countries. The true number of coronavirus infections and deaths from covid-19 in most African countries will, however, probably never be known. All, or nearly all, do not test enough. And most do not count causes of death.