DURING THE pandemic, young people have often been accused of endangering their elders by flocking to beaches and returning prematurely to cafes, restaurants and bars. But younger folk are no more cavalier about the coronavirus than their older counterparts. In fact the evidence suggests that, if anything, it is old people who underestimate the risks posed by the virus. In a new working paper, researchers from Harvard University, Bocconi University and the University of Oxford report the results of a survey in May of more than 1,500 Americans about the health risks posed by covid-19 for themselves and others. The preliminary results show that respondents aged 18-34 consider themselves to be nearly three times more likely to contract the disease than respondents over 70 do. On average, they reckon they have a 8.75% chance of catching it; over-70s put their own risk at only 3% (see chart). The authors suggest that this may be because young people have more active lives and come into contact with more people, whereas old people tend to be more sheltered. Curiously, young people also consider themselves more likely to die from the disease than older people do. Across the entire sample, respondents estimated that covid-19 kills between 1% and 2% of those infected, on average, only slightly above some scientific estimates of the disease’s fatality rate. But that figure varied depending on the respondent. People aged under 35 reckoned that, were they to contract covid-19, they would have a 2% chance of dying from it; respondents over the age of 70 put their own chance of dying at just 1%. In fact, under-35s are about a tenth as likely to die from the disease as they think, while over-70s are five to ten times more likely. Young people are also much gloomier than older generations about other people’s odds of making it through the pandemic. Although every age group was aware that the risk of dying from the virus rises with age, people under 35 years old expected the mortality rate for other age groups to be twice as high as older people did. The authors point out that young people have lived through fewer big health scares than their parents and grandparents. Now that one has come along, they may perceive it as more serious. Of course, just because young people overestimate the deadliness of the disease doesn’t mean they will do more to stop its spread. But when it comes to beliefs about covid-19, it appears that foolhardiness comes with age, and prudence with youth.