SARAH WILLIS first visited Havana in February 2017. She was working in Miami with the New World Symphony Orchestra and figured she may as well take the hour-long flight across the Strait of Florida, as “it was so close and I was so keen to experience live Cuban music and dance salsa,” she says. On arrival she was invited to give some lessons in the French horn—as a member of the Berlin Philharmonic, she is one of the world’s leading brass players—to local musicians. To her surprise, dozens of people from all over the country turned up to her workshops, all of them passionate about music and many of them capable of playing to a high standard. Their instruments, however, did not pass muster. Cuba is celebrated for its love of mambo and cha-cha-chá, but there is a real enthusiasm for the European classical repertoire in the country, particularly for the work of Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart. There is a bust of the composer in Old Havana and an annual Mozart festival has been held in the capital since 2015 by the Lyceum Mozartiano de La Habana, a performing arts space, the Instituto Superior de Arte, one of Cuba’s most distinguished colleges for musical education, and the Mozarteum University in Salzburg. When Ms Willis returned to Havana for the festival in the autumn of 2017 she drew attention to this cultural tradition in “Sarah’s Music”, a weekly television programme produced with Deutsche Welle, a German public broadcaster, which she hosts. (She also fronts a popular web series called “Horn Hangouts”, in which she interviews famous musicians.) Ms Willis decided that she would raise money for new instruments for local players by producing an album in the city and donating the profits. The record had a challenging birth. Acquiring visas for the German television crew and audio staff was difficult. Keeping the French horn in tune in the Cuban heat was arduous, even in January, and it took Ms Willis some time to acclimatise. “At least the humidity was not as bad as in the summer and the recordings did not start before 10.30 at night,” she says. “But it was still pretty hot in the [concert venue, the Oratorio San Filipe Neri] which made playing the horn tricky for me—I had permanently sticky hands and also sweat running down my face, which made it hard to keep the mouthpiece of the horn secure on my lips.” “Mozart y Mambo”, the result of that “wonderful, exciting but somewhat crazy project”, in Ms Willis’s words, was released on July 10th. It bears no evidence of sticky hands or sliding mouthpieces. The album includes Mozart’s horn concertos as well as traditional Cuban music, conducted by José Antonio Méndez Padrón and featuring the Havana Lyceum Orchestra. “It was very important for me to play pure Mozart and pure Cuban music,” Ms Willis says; there are “two pieces on the album where we combine the two...the arrangers have done it in such a clever way”. She says that her fellow players often told her that “Mozart would have been a good Cuban”, on the grounds of his melodies, syncopated rhythms and, most importantly, his zest for life. A European concert tour scheduled for this summer had to be cancelled due to the coronavirus pandemic, but a documentary film (“Mozart y Mambo. A Cuban Journey with Sarah Willis”) about the project and about classical music in Cuba is available to stream online. A video of a concert in Havana will also be released in the coming months, and behind-the-scenes videos of the making of the album are available on Ms Willis’s website. She is convinced that once people have listened to the record and seen the documentary they will be even more keen to see the talented musicians perform live. She calls the experience one of the “highlights of my life” for “Cubans don’t just play music. They are music. They live and breathe it. I learned so much from them.”