IN THE LATE 1960s, after 250 years of slavery and Jim Crow laws, African-American households earned around 60% of what white households did. They also had just 10% of the assets of the typical white family. More than 50 years on, the income and wealth gaps remain just as wide. Although the ceiling on opportunity has started to lift—and America elected a black president—systemic prejudice persists. Policing and the criminal-justice systems may be the most obvious example: witness the protests since the killing of George Floyd. But the chief factor underlying the economic disadvantages facing African-Americans is the concentrated poverty in largely segregated black communities. Tackling segregation, the legacy of enforced separation, is paramount; improving education and alleviating child poverty are also priorities. Liberal policies, we argue in our cover leader, can help; but a new ideology of race, which has emerged in American universities, will only hinder progress. Since the covid-19 pandemic began, the share of Americans who “sometimes” or “often” do not have enough to eat has risen by two percentage points. One-fifth of African-American households are in this position. Yet the pandemic has not caused a generalised increase in poverty. The overall rate may even have fallen. The chief reason is America’s huge fiscal stimulus, including direct payments to households and a temporary rise in unemployment insurance (UI). Three-quarters of job-losers will have a higher income than they did in work. But the poorest Americans (lacking bank accounts to receive handouts, or caught up in delays to UI) may be missing out on Uncle Sam’s largesse. Governments in many other countries have spent freely, too; Britain promised another dollop this week. But although confidence may be fragile, stimulus will soon have to wind down. Once the leading lights of China’s bustling digital economy could be summarised by BAT: Baidu, a search engine; Alibaba, an online emporium; and Tencent, a payments and video-games firm. No longer. Baidu has been left trailing and others are chasing the big two. Meituan Dianping and Pinduoduo are exciting investors most. Both began by luring shoppers with discount vouchers, but Meituan Dianping has branched into delivery and travel whereas Pinduoduo has doubled down on e-commerce. Meanwhile, the tech cold war between China and America (and its allies) is intensifying. Huawei, a telecoms giant, is again in the firing line. Another corporate target, SMIC, China’s national semiconductor champion, is selling shares—a sign of renewed determination to build domestic chipmaking capacity. The 23rd International AIDS Conference had been due to take place in San Francisco. Because of another pandemic, covid-19, it was held in cyberspace instead. Last year 1.9m people were newly infected with HIV and 690,000 suffered AIDS-related deaths. Yet the numbers, though huge, are heading downwards. Conference participants were told that further advances in prevention and treatment are on the cards. However, the amount of money available to deal with HIV in low- and middle-income countries—in some of which, such as India, covid-19 remains rampant—has been falling. And for now, at least, the focus on the new virus threatens to interrupt the flows of both cash and anti-retroviral drugs. Iran has admitted that an explosion at its Natanz nuclear plant on July 2nd did “significant damage” to a factory for centrifuges to make uranium. The blast was one of several unusual recent incidents, including a blast near the Parchin military base. Suspicion has fallen on America and Israel, which both have form in sabotaging Iran’s nuclear programme. But what looks like tactical success is in fact evidence of strategic failure. Iran’s nuclear advance had been contained by an international agreement, until President Donald Trump withdrew and piled sanctions on Iran, claiming this would yield a better deal. Not only has he failed; he has pushed Iran into more dangerous territory.