“THE ADVENTURES of China Iron”, one of six translated works of fiction shortlisted for this year’s International Booker Prize, is an anarchic reformulation of “Martín Fierro”, a 19th-century Argentine gaucho poem. When Martín, the cutthroat cowboy, is conscripted, China, his adolescent wife, jumps aboard a wagon with a Scottish pioneer called Liz and embarks on her own journey of discovery. Liz lops off China’s golden tresses, puts her in male uniform and seduces her. She introduces her to the English language and to a globalising world of trade, railways and industry that promises to sweep aside the picaresque gaucho way of life. More than a playful historical pastiche, in the hands of Gabriela Cabezón Cámara (pictured)—and through China’s eyes—Argentina’s pampas come alive. The landscape swarms with armadillos and rodents. Rivers burst their banks, sweeping herds of cattle away. As the numbness drilled into her by poverty and brutality gradually subsides, China comes to behold the power of the natural world and its native defenders. Fiona Mackintosh and Iona Macintyre, both academics at the University of Edinburgh, skilfully translate her transformation from camp-follower into shamanic, canoe-borne warrior. As her motley band slips upstream and out of Argentina’s official history, China’s chatty Spanglish narration becomes more languid, strewn with Guaraní terms for plants and riverine currents. The subject matter—a Scottish-Argentine love affair, and the mind-altering power of translation—is the perfect fit for Charco Press. (Charco, meaning “puddle”, is slang in several Latin American countries for the Atlantic Ocean.) The Edinburgh-based publishing house was born four years ago “from passion but also a deep frustration,” says Carolina Orloff, its founder and editor. She grew up steeped in the flourishing literary scene of Buenos Aires; the bookshop her family ran counted Jorge Luis Borges among its regular customers. But on moving to Britain she was struck by how Latin American literature, beyond giants such as Gabriel García Márquez, was almost “terra incognita” to British readers. Assembling a formidable team of literary translators, Ms Orloff and her partner Samuel McDowell set out to bring outstanding voices from contemporary Latin American letters— usually already prize-winners in their original Spanish or Portuguese—to a wider audience. Of their 20 books published since 2017, “The Adventures of China Iron”, with its hallucinatory passages, comes closest to magical realism. Other titles, each with a striking abstract cover by Pablo Font, an Argentine designer, defy easy categorisation. Margarita García Robayo’s “Holiday Heart” explores the estrangement (with each other and their homeland) of a Colombian couple in Miami and Connecticut. In “Trout, Belly Up”, Rodrigo Fuentes laces together short stories set in rural Guatemala (a relapsed alcoholic loses his dog, gunmen threaten a seaside village, a fish farm fails) with a sense of menace and tragedy. The narrator of “Loop”—the first work by Brenda Lozano, a Mexican author, to be translated into English—weaves in and out of subjects and styles as she waits for her boyfriend to return from overseas. “Resistance”, by Julián Fuks, portrays a family in exile in Brazil in the 1970s. “They’re literally worlds apart,” emphasises Ms Orloff. “I wanted to move away from the clichés and the generalisations that I think have been ingrained way too long.” The only British publisher dedicated to authors from Latin America, Charco Press is the standard-bearer for a new, international wave of interest in the region’s literature. Also shortlisted for this year’s International Booker Prize is “Hurricane Season”, an unconventional detective story by Fernanda Melchor set in small-town Mexico. Its publisher, Fitzcarraldo Editions, which was founded in London in 2014, and translator, Sophie Hughes, also landed a spot on last year’s shortlist with “The Remainder” by Alia Trabucco Zerán, an examination of the ghosts of post-dictatorship Chile. Latin American writing enjoys a higher profile across the Atlantic. Valeria Luiselli’s novel of 2019, “Lost Children Archive”, her first in English, was shaped by her experiences working as a court translator for Central American children separated from their parents at the Mexican border. It was a finalist for the National Book Critics Circle Award. There is also an appetite for relatively unknown authors, regardless of their direct contemporary relevance. Major new translations of Antonio di Benedetto, a mid-century Argentine existentialist, the peculiarly endearing short stories of Juan Carlos Onetti (from Uruguay), and the 19th-century Brazilian satirist Machado de Assis have been published to wide acclaim in the United States since 2016. The Edinburgh publishing house, which is supported by the Arts Council and Creative Scotland, nevertheless remains an underdog in a field of underdogs. While 15% of fiction sold in Europe is in translation, this proportion falls to scarcely 4% in Britain and is lower still in America. Charco Press titles often sell fewer than 3,000 copies. But Ms Orloff describes Charco’s inclusion on this year’s International Booker shortlist as an encouragement to take further gambles on unusual titles. Ms Cabezón Cámara has since sold the rights to “The Adventures of China Iron” in ten countries, including Egypt, Croatia and Greece. The book will also be available to readers in North America—where Charco signed a distribution deal in late 2019—from October 13th. The proverbial puddle seems to be shrinking.