ON A SUMMER’S day in 1518, a woman walked out of her house in Strasbourg and started to dance energetically in the street. Apart from stolen moments for sleep, she did not stop for six days. Crowds gathered as she pranced and twirled; people around the city began to join her until hundreds were dancing together. To modern readers it may sound like a flash mob or a work of performance art, but this event came to be known as the “dancing plague of 1518”. The collective dancing carried on, unexplained, for two months. Distressed and in pain, those afflicted seemed to be moving against their will; it is thought that some died from exhaustion. Most historians believe that this plague was in fact a mass psychogenic illness, often referred to as “mass hysteria”. It was not a standalone event: instances of “dancing mania” reportedly took place across Europe, particularly in the Holy Roman Empire, between the 14th and the 17th centuries. “Strasbourg 1518” has reimagined this unusual historical event at a time when cities are gripped by a contagion of a different kind. Co-commissioned by Artangel, an arts organisation, and Sadler’s Wells, a dance and theatre company, the new short film was devised and directed by Jonathan Glazer, a British film-maker. It stars five dancers from the Tanztheater Wuppertal Pina Bausch company who perform in bare rooms day and night. They cavort as if gripped by mania, with desperate, repeated movements, sparse ominous laughter and muttered speech. It is set to a frenetic soundtrack by Mica Levi, with whom Mr Glazer collaborated on a feature film, “Under the Skin” (2013). Mr Glazer’s work often explores nightmarish scenarios and dark psychological states. He had wanted to develop a project based on the dancing plague ever since reading “A Time to Dance, a Time to Die”, John Waller’s book on the subject, published in 2009. “We talked about it as an idea for a project, but it was shelved a year ago,” says Michael Morris, co-director of Artangel. “Then this April, in the midst of lockdown, he reminded me of it, and for obvious reasons we decided to go down that path. It suddenly became very relevant to connect an event 500 years ago to what’s going on today.” It is ironic that the choreomania of 1518 drew crowds but that this new work shows isolated dancers due to social-distancing measures. In Strasbourg, the afflicted were eventually taken to a shrine to St Vitus, a Christian saint many believed could heal sickness (he is also considered the patron saint of dance), where they were apparently given red shoes to wear. Though the reason for this is unknown, the association of red shoes with uncontrolled dancing has endured throughout the centuries, particularly in Hans Christian Andersen’s fairy-tale “The Red Shoes”. One of the dancers in “Strasbourg 1518” wears a red dress, perhaps as a nod to this tradition. Yet the film does not strive for any kind of historical accuracy. “It’s not a literal film,” says Mr Morris. “I hope it’s not described as a lockdown film either...What we really want to suggest is that you’re watching a ten-minute fragment of something that’s been going on for hundreds of years and that will continue for hundreds of years.” “Strasbourg 1518” is available on iPlayer now