THE FIRST live-streamed global art auction began at a civilised 6.30pm, cocktail hour in New York, on June 29th. For Londoners it was nearly midnight and for Hong Kongers barely dawn the following day. Oliver Barker, chairman of Sotheby’s Europe, ran the sale from a purpose-built studio with eight screens in the auction house’s London gallery; Joel Mischon, a cinematographer, whose production company makes “The X Factor” and “Strictly Come Dancing”, was called in to choreograph the operation. Yet for all this technological innovation, tradition was also on display: staff members in New York and Hong Kong took telephone bids on old-fashioned landlines with coiled black cables. The customary carved gavel—brought down to complete a sale after what the auction house calls “fair warning”—rested on the podium. It had been a week of experiment and change across the auction market. Christie’s former rainmaker, Loïc Gouzer, who brought in the Leonardo da Vinci that sold for $450m, a world record, in 2017, announced that after taking time off to recover from Lyme disease, he was back with a members-only app through which he would sell one artwork a week. Bidding would last no more than a few minutes (“You snooze, you lose,” he told the Wall Street Journal). Christie’s, meanwhile, announced that it was merging its Impressionist and modern art and its contemporary art departments, annihilating a distinction that has existed for decades. But it was Sotheby’s streamed, real-time version of its cancelled spring sales that got the most attention. At the helm was Mr Barker, who led the fabled Damien Hirst auction in 2008 on the day Lehman Brothers collapsed and the Dow Jones fell more than 500 points. The sale on June 29th was the culmination of planning and development that began a year ago when the French telecom magnate and art collector, Patrick Drahi, took over Sotheby’s in a surprise $3.7bn deal. Mr Drahi appointed Charles Stewart, a former investment banker and media executive, as CEO to step up the company’s use of technology. Before the auction visitors were invited to take an online tour of the art and to use augmented reality to place the artworks in their own homes. “You reach the point where the technology has to get out of the way so the client can really appreciate the art,” says Stefan Pepe, whom Mr Stewart appointed to head up Sotheby’s new product and technology unit. Nothing was left to chance on the night. Many of the lots were guaranteed or had “third-party irrevocable bids” before bidding started, which meant they were in effect pre-sold. But there were still a few lessons, which the entire auction market will now be reflecting on. First, despite the slickness of Mr Mishcon’s production, a real-time global auction is a lumbering bear: it took nearly five hours to sell 62 lots, more than three times what it would have taken in the auction room. By the end of the night, everyone was exhausted. Second, the works that sold most easily were trendy, well-priced and in short supply. “The Realm of Appearances”, Matthew Wong’s wonderfully dense landscape from 2018, was estimated to fetch $60,000-80,000. Aspiring buyers were so keen to get their hands on it they left pre-sale bids of up to $850,000 with the auctioneer; after some spirited further bidding, the painting sold for $1.8m. (Wong, a Canadian artist, killed himself last October, and his work almost never comes up for sale.) By contrast, more challenging works are very hard to sell virtually, however great they may be. Clyfford Still was one of the key figures of American Abstract Expressionism. He left almost all his work to a museum, and it rarely comes up for auction. Although he is a master, and “PH-144 (1947-Y-No.1)” was painted at the apex of his career, it attracted only one bid on the night. An American collector got it for the low estimate, $25m plus fees—a bargain. Third, and this may be the most important thing to take away from the Sotheby’s sale, in the right genres, at least, buyers are no longer nervous of bidding online for artworks, even at the highest level. Previously the most anyone had ever spent on a single item in an online auction was $5.99m for a pair of diamond earrings in a sale in Geneva in 2016. In the Sotheby’s sale, an online bidder in China spent more than ten minutes trying to secure Francis Bacon’s epic “Triptych Inspired by the Oresteia of Aeschylus”. That he didn’t win it in the end is less important than the fact that he was willing to bid $73.1m online in the attempt. (In the end it was sold by phone to a client of Grégoire Billault, Sotheby’s head of contemporary art in New York, for $84.6m) For auction houses, online bidding is simpler, cheaper and easier to administer than the traditional kind. Sotheby’s says the viewing audience for the digital auction was five times the average for major evening sales, at which it sells its most expensive merchandise—proof that the global buying potential is huge. A third of its new clients in the past year have been online bidders. Every auction house wants more of them, and for each one to spend more money. Sotheby’s may have been the first to live-stream a major sale, but it shan’t be the last.