TRIO SONATAS fell out of fashion long ago: composers haven’t written them for over 150 years. But lockdown is the ideal time to rediscover them, as we argue in a piece in this week’s issue of The Economist. The music is warm and intimate, usually played (despite the name) by four musicians—two upper lines, often violins but sometimes winds; a bass part, often a cello or a bass viol; and an instrument to fill in the harmony, a harpsichord or a lute. They are designed for life on a smaller scale—for the spare room rather than the concert hall. Click the link below, or on the preview at the bottom of the page, to listen to some of the best. The Economist’s Trio-Sonata Playlist 1-3. Arcangelo Corelli, Sonata da camera a tre in F Sharp Minor, Op. 2 no 9. The Purcell Quartet. Corelli wrote 48 trio sonatas. This example contains many of his distinctive imitations, suspensions and flourishes widely adopted by later composers. Its jaunty last movement is especially good. 4-6. Carl Philipp Emanuel Bach, Trio Sonata in A Minor, Wq148, H.572. Les Amis de Philippe. Here the violin is paired with a flute to great effect. The outer movements are nervy and restless, never settling, set against a still, melancholy adagio. 7. Henry Purcell, Sonatas of III parts, Sonata 12 in D Major, Z801. Pavlo Beznosiuk, Rachel Podger, Christophe Coin, Christopher Hogwood. It is hard to pick out one of Purcell’s trio sonatas as they are all worth listening to. But this is one of his best, packing in exquisite dances, hymn-like melody and fierce fugal passage work. 8. Antonio Vivaldi, Trio Sonata in D Minor RV 63 “Follia”. L’Arte dell’Arco. A set of variations on a familiar sequence of chords that becomes increasingly crazed as it proceeds. The Red Priest at his most headstrong. 9. Giovanni Legrenzi, 18 Trio Sonatas Op. 2, No 17. Parnassi Musici. Legrenzi’s quirky trio sonatas come with nicknames—this one is “La manina” (or “Little Hand”) and its charm derives from the replacement of the bass viol with a bassoon that chunters along beneath the fiddle melodies. 10-13. George Frideric Handel, Trio Sonata in B Minor, Op. 2 No. 1, HWV386b. London Handel Players. Handel recycled material and, listening to the Op.2 and Op 5. trio sonatas, familiar tunes from the operas and oratorios pop up like old friends. But here they are on a scale fit for the sitting-room. 14. Domenico Gallo: No.1 in G Major. Parnassi Musici. Fans of Igor Stravinsky will recognise this as material used in his ballet “Pulcinella”, under the mistaken belief that it was by Giovanni Battista Pergolesi. It’s fascinating to hear how Stravinsky has added rhythmic and harmonic spice to Gallo’s music. 15-17. William Boyce, Trio Sonata No 4 in G Minor. Collegium Musicum. Listen out for the slow middle movement without a continuo, solemn and still, set against a charming gavotte to wrap up. The first violin here is Simon Standage, the father of our deputy editor, Tom. 18-21. Georg Philipp Telemann. Sonata No. 3 in A Major, TWV 42:A2. Parnassi Musici. A composer of extraordinary facility, Telemann wrote around 150 trio sonatas. This one stands out not just for the energy of its concluding dance, but also the third movement, where Telemann gives the melody to the organ, while the cello picks out the bass line in pizzicato. 22-24. Johann Sebastian Bach, Trio Sonata in C Minor BWV 526. The Brook Street Band. The master at work. Originally for organ, this is fabulous written out for strings, too. As the music washes over you, it’s saying that, come what may, the world will keep on turning. 