WITH MUCH of the world economy in an induced coma, it is easy to think that it will be permanently hobbled by the covid-19 crisis. Yet history suggests that if a vaccine or a treatment is found, there is a good chance that the world will bounce back to where it was—provided wise economic and public-health policies are in place. The speed with which Germany, Japan, Britain and France recovered after the second world war is testimony to the tendency of market economies to return to their previous performance when normality is restored. In Japan, aerial bombings destroyed 66 major cities almost entirely and killed around 350,000 people. Yet within 15 years the cities had completely recovered. The worse they were hit, the faster they returned to their pre-war levels. Something similar happened in Germany. This rebound is not just a feature of advanced economies. During the Vietnam war, the country was subjected to the most intense bombing campaign in history, at massive human and economic cost. And yet again, by 2000, there was no difference in poverty, infrastructure, or physical and human capital between areas that were bombed and those that were not. For economists, this rapid regional convergence is the best example of the logic of capitalism. The fundamental qualities that made an area attractive in the first place are still there: a river, a central location, a long history, a good education system and the like. Businesses will want to invest, people will want to move back and the more a city is damaged, the faster its recovery will be. A pandemic is somewhat similar to bombings during a war, in that the levelling of the economy is mainly caused by external forces. So we may expect something similar to happen. (Of course, if a vaccine or treatment does not show up in the near future, then things will be considerably more complicated, as the way every business operates will need to be rethought.) It is worth remembering that the economic convergence that prevailed after the second world war did not happen without government intervention. In Europe, the Marshall Plan brought in much needed American financing. Post-war Vietnam was a highly centralised economy that could direct funds where it wanted easily and swiftly. Another feature is that these countries emerged from conflict with strong governments that enjoyed a fair amount of legitimacy (albeit with very different political systems). Finally—and relevantly—most of these countries had very little inequality, which surely contributed to the sense of a joint enterprise. It is probably no accident that in countries where institutions and the economy collapsed in wartime, such as the Democratic Republic of Congo, Somalia and Afghanistan, there was no rebound when the conflicts ended. Instead, the countries plunged into further chaos. The biggest danger, therefore, is that the combination of a public-health crisis where many people die and an economic crisis that results from the lockdowns will undermine the legitimacy of the state and exacerbate pre-existing problems. This may make it very hard to return to a more-or-less stable social equilibrium. This risk is probably highest where the social equilibrium is already fragile, for example in much of the developing world. However countries like Italy, France and America—where inequality has become corrosive and resentment drives a substantial part of politics—may not be too far from the precipice of social instability. To preserve its future, it is critical that the state in many of these vulnerable countries acts to hold on to, and ideally rebuild, its legitimacy. That is a complex undertaking, but at a minimum involves organising a competent response to the covid-19 crisis, including management of its economic implications. There is a rough consensus among public-health experts and economists about what countries must do. First, avert a collapse of the health-care system during the epidemic’s peak. Second, support vulnerable citizens financially through unconditional and nearly universal cash transfers, to make the lockdown bearable (and feasible). Third, test enough people for the virus on a systematic basis to determine when and where reopening is possible. This is undoubtedly going to cost a lot. In rich countries, this should not be any problem whatsoever and any failure to do that would be a self-inflicted wound. They can borrow at very low cost without affecting their credit standing. We hope that the American and European governments remember the lessons of 2008 and do not call for a return to fiscal “discipline” too early. Poor countries, however, fret about their credit ratings if they are seen to be fiscally undisciplined. Even India, a large, middle-income economy, is paralysed by fear of the consequences if it deviates from macroeconomic conservatism. In Africa, countries are unable to put the necessary measures in place unless they are financially supported and their debts are forgiven. Moreover, they will need funds to pay for medicine and potential vaccines. So these countries won’t manage on their own. What the world needs now is a “Covid-19 Marshall Plan” for poor countries. Only then would we have a chance to experience a post-coronavirus recovery that will look more like the “thirty glorious years” that followed the second world war, the Great Depression and before that, the last great pandemic.■ Abhijit Banerjee and Esther Duflo are professors at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology working on empirical evidence around economic development. They shared a Nobel Prize in economics in 2019, along with Michael Kremer of Harvard University. Their most recent book is “Good Economics for Hard Times: Better Answers to Our Biggest Problems” (PublicAffairs, 2019).