AFTER TWO months of near-total lockdown, India’s 1.3bn people need relief. During that time the country has reported 3,000 covid-19 deaths, yet some 120m have been thrown out of work. Among the very poor, the devastation has been extreme. A just-published survey of some 4,000 working beneficiaries of various aid schemes from ten different NGOs found that two-thirds had lost their jobs, and almost half did not have enough cash to survive more than a week. Among those who pay rent, three-quarters said they will not be able to pay the coming month’s. India’s central and state governments have tried hard to help, with everything from cash handouts to bags of free food. Narendra Modi, the prime minister, on May 12th pledged an overall stimulus amounting to some $266bn, around 10% of GDP. Much of that has already been disbursed, however, or takes the form of loan guarantees for businesses, tax relief and other measures that are aimed at middle-class Indians, not the neediest. Among the urban poor recently surveyed, 31% had yet to receive any free food and 70% any cash from the government. With little capacity to do more, some Indian states have taken a radically different approach. Those that export labour have been particularly stung by mass lay-offs, and especially by the chaotic and cruel treatment of perhaps 50m suddenly jobless migrant workers. Hoping to stimulate employment at home, at least nine of India’s 36 states and territories have in recent weeks imposed (or thought about imposing) changes to labour codes that in normal times might have faced fierce opposition. Five states, for instance, have issued ordinances increasing the maximum legal workday from eight hours to 11 or even 12. The maximum working week in Uttar Pradesh, a poor state with some 220m people, has been extended from 48 hours to a Dickensian 72. Just to the south, Madhya Pradesh on May 6th announced that for the next 1,000 days, new investors will be exempted from a swathe of labour rules, ignored by labour inspectors and insulated from trade unions. Uttar Pradesh then upped the ante by offering similar incentives for three years to all firms, not just new ones. Not to be outdone, Gujarat, Mr Modi’s home state, declared it would grant labour-law exemptions for 1,200 days from the start of production of any new venture in the state. Other states joining this race to the bottom include Assam, Haryana, Odisha, Punjab, Rajasthan and Uttarakhand. Most, but not all, happen to be governed by Mr Modi’s Hindu-nationalist Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP). All have made use of the exceptional circumstances, including the fact that state legislatures are out of session, to issue the new rules as emergency ordinances. The giddy leap in joblessness, from 8% in February to around 25% now, according to the Centre for Monitoring the Indian Economy, a research group, is the most obvious reason to make hiring easier. Another is the hope of luring some of the many foreign firms that are just now looking to reduce reliance on China by investing elsewhere. Among the obstacles cited by foreign investors to explain their historical wariness of India, the volume, stringency and sheer fiddliness of labour rules is one of the most bemoaned. Much of India’s labour legislation dates from the dreamy post-independence years, when determination to build a socialist paradise got ahead of the need to create the wealth to support one. The crisis presents an opportunity not just to peel off the red tape, but to reshape the economy in the process. One reason why India has lost so many jobs so quickly is that nine out of ten jobs are in the informal sector. (These workers are either self-employed, or casual labourers, or have no direct contract with their employer.) The persistence of this ratio, despite decades of impressive growth and rising prosperity, can largely be explained by cumbersome labour rules that create incentives for companies either to stay small, to subcontract employment to brokers and middlemen, or else to invest in capital equipment rather than a bigger or better-trained workforce. The Industrial Employment (Standing Orders) Act, 1946, for instance, requires any establishment with more than 100 workers to secure government approval if it wishes to fire anyone, or even to reassign personnel. Economists have long demanded labour-law reform, arguing that it would create not only more jobs but better, more formal ones. Had such changes been made, India might well have been spared some of its current mess. Yet many economists now protest that state governments may be throwing out the baby with the bathwater. Some note that it is often not the laws that are onerous so much as the slow and haphazard legal system that is meant to apply them. Besides, notes T.N. Ninan, editor of the Business Standard, a financial daily, governments that act arbitrarily may simply make investors wonder if they will be at the receiving end of similar arbitrariness tomorrow. Not all businesses are pleased, either. Rajiv Bajaj, owner of one of India’s top two-and three-wheeled vehicle brands, says reforms should not mean wholesale abandonment of rules, but Indian governments have “mastered the art of swinging from one end of the pendulum to the other.” More worryingly for Mr Modi’s BJP, some of the fiercest opposition to the scrapping of labour rules has come from the Bharatiya Mazdoor Sangh. Claiming 10m members, the group is not just India’s biggest independent labour organisation. More importantly it belongs to the sangh parivar or “family” of Hindu-nationalist groups that spawned the BJP itself. In the end, even if scrapping labour rules does end up benefiting the workers they were designed to protect, their troubles are acute. Just now what they need is cash in hand, not a better chance of future employment.