THE SINO-AMERICAN chip war is getting hotter. A year ago America banned its technology companies from selling to Huawei. It fears the Chinese company’s growing prowess in 5G telecoms and worries that Huawei-equipped networks could aid Chinese spying (which the firm denies). That ban was easily circumvented. So now America has barred the use of American equipment to produce chips for Huawei, hoping to choke off supplies. Huawei says the new ban threatens its survival. But this blockade, too, may be ineffective. Huawei need never touch the blacklisted chips. Its phones are usually assembled by contract manufacturers who supply customers directly. Asian chip foundries are hard to monitor from Washington. And the industry is anyway becoming less American. The Economist estimates that the top dozen semiconductor firms have only 20% of their physical assets in the United States. The ban may drive more of America’s industry offshore. The closure of much of the world economy has led to huge cuts in greenhouse-gas emissions. The International Energy Agency’s best guess is that industrial CO2 emissions will fall by 8% this year. That is just a small fraction of the decarbonisation needed to get the world on track to meet the goals of the Paris climate agreement of 2015. But the pandemic creates a chance to enact greener policies, such as further stimulus for renewable energy and carbon pricing, at lower cost than might have been the case. To meet the Paris goals, emissions must decline, and the world’s energy system be transformed. Policy choices now may determine whether the peak will be postponed, flattened—or is even already in the past. Sadly, covid-19 is reversing another long-term trend: the global decline in poverty. Between 1990 and 2019 the number of extremely poor people fell from 2bn (36% of the world’s population) to 630m (8%) but is now rising fast. The shutdown of economic activity has cut off earnings from those least able to lose them; India’s sudden shutdown in March threw an estimated 140m out of work. It has also blocked “coping mechanisms” for dealing with adversity (eg, help from relatives) which depend on calamity not striking everyone at once. Remittances from migrant workers, the World Bank estimates, will fall by 20% this year. Poor countries will need help from richer ones. But the rich world appears too occupied with its own problems to pay much heed. General lockdowns seem to have arrested the spread of covid-19. As they are eased, measures to control the pandemic will have to be more calibrated, to shield those most at risk. Who those people are is now becoming clearer. A recent British study confirms that old age is the biggest risk factor: data from nine countries gathered by The Economist indicate that 40-80% of deaths have been in care homes for the elderly and infirm. Members of ethnic minorities have also suffered higher death rates. Some occupations are riskier than others. Ideas to protect the vulnerable are popping up. Finer tuning will require more data. Greater testing capacity and better tests will help—and should limit the social and economic cost of future waves of infection. If you believe Russia’s official statistics, the country has coped with covid-19 far better than the West. Though its infection rate is high, the proportion of infected people who have died is remarkably low: 1%, against 4.5% in Germany and 14% in Britain. That has encouraged President Vladimir Putin to end the country’s undeclared lockdown. Yet the fatality rate among infected doctors (who keep their own records) is much higher than elsewhere; medics are complaining on social media of being muzzled; regional data show improbable patterns. Estimates from excess deaths suggest that the true toll is well above the official figure. The official data reveal less about covid-19 than they do about Russia’s political system.