THE SONG begins with plaintive melodic whistling, the sort of theme produced by the hero of a Spaghetti Western as he walks into the sunset. Electric guitars and synthesisers provide backing chords and gentle licks, before the rasping voice of the lead singer begins: “I follow the Moskva / Down to Gorky Park / Listening to the wind of change…” Musically, “Wind of Change”, released in 1990, is a fairly standard power ballad. It was not the usual fare of Scorpions, a West German rock band best known for their odes to partying and lust—in particular their head-banging hit “Rock You Like a Hurricane”—and for their leather and spandex get-ups. They followed the likes of Poison, Skid Row and Warrant in showing that rockers could tug on the heartstrings, too. But unlike the odes to erstwhile lovers such as “Every Rose Has Its Thorn” or “I Remember You”, “Wind of Change” explored the subject of social and political change. The verses are dreamlike and hopeful; “the world is closing in” and “the future’s in the air”, before a drum ushers in the anthemic chorus. The song went down well in America, peaking at number four on the Billboard chart, but in Europe the reception was rapturous. It topped the charts in nine countries, ranking highly in dozens more, and sold 14m copies worldwide. To this day it is one of the biggest-selling singles ever, and easily the most popular by a German group; an official YouTube video, released in 2009, has been played more than 760m times. In this way, “Wind of Change” became the soundtrack to the end of the cold war. Inspired by glasnost and the band’s week-long visit to Russia to perform at the Moscow Music Peace Festival in 1989, Klaus Meine had written both the lyrics and the music after a boat trip down the Moskva river. That, at least, is the official story. In an enjoyable new podcast, Patrick Radden Keefe, a journalist, investigates a different tale about the song’s origin: that it was written by the CIA. Years ago, a former CIA officer (dubbed “Oliver”) disclosed to “Michael”, a friend of Mr Radden Keefe’s, that the song was part of a psychological operation to promote change in the Soviet Union. Intrigued, and since Michael’s tips had often proved worthwhile, Mr Radden Keefe researched the story on and off for a decade. He soon realised that, with its combination of rock culture, espionage and conspiracy theory, it would be the perfect yarn for a podcast. In telling the story, Mr Radden Keefe takes the listener on a tour from Kyiv to Langley, stopping at a toy convention in Ohio, a folk-rock show in Armenia and drug stings on the coast of Florida. He encounters a colourful cast of retired intelligence agents (sometimes voiced by actors), tattooed guitar slingers, ex-smugglers, jazz musicians, diplomats, journalists, Russian heavy-metal fans and Mr Meine, all of whom help Mr Radden Keefe fill in the blanks. (He says he also spoke to Matthias Jabs, the lead guitarist of Scorpions, but that the interview was not included in the final cut.) These interactions are frequently ridiculous but always entertaining. After a few episodes, the notion that “the Company” might write a soft-rock hit to promote democracy does not sound risible. Mr Radden Keefe does a good job of chronicling the agency’s meddling in the arts, reminding listeners of “Argo”, an operation in which CIA agents posed as a film crew in Iran (dramatised in an Oscar-winning film in 2012) and the CIA’s publication of a Russian-language version of Boris Pasternak’s novel “Doctor Zhivago” (confirmed in documents declassified in 2014). If the American government sponsored tours of jazz greats to boost its influence in places such as Nigeria, as Mr Radden Keefe explores in episode three, why wouldn’t it dabble in writing rock songs for the Iron Curtain? That becomes more plausible still in light of a story published by the Guardian on May 27th, which claims that in 2011 “the United States funded rock groups in Venezuela to record songs promoting democracy—and undermine the rule of Hugo Chávez”. “Wind of Change” sweeps listeners up Mr Radden Keefe’s world, where pop culture meets state secrets and where the line between the serious and the absurd is blurred. It does not dwell too much on any countervailing narrative, Scorpions’ denials or on the fact that the song was released too late to have any real effect on the tottering Soviet Union. In the end, the rumour is hard to prove. But as a tale of soft power and soft rock, “Wind of Change” is great listening. All episodes of “Wind of Change” are available on Spotify now