IN THE 1951 film, “The Day the Earth Stood Still,” visitors from outer space threaten to destroy our planet unless East and West agree to halt their dangerous military rivalry. Tellingly, the aliens direct their warning to scientists on both sides, in whom they place more hope than politicians. Humanity can be saved, they suggest, only if ruled by reason; an awareness of common purpose must outweigh tribal passions. Late last year a tiny virus started to broadcast a similar message. In response the UN Secretary General, António Guterres, urged combatants everywhere to suspend violent conflict. “There should be only one fight in our world today,” he declared, “our shared battle against covid-19.” Mr Guterres’s eloquent plea generated more verbal support than it did holstering of guns. This surprised no one. Throughout history, people have shown a depressing tendency to square off when logic would have brought them together. And in recent years, many heads of government have distanced themselves from the whole concept of global co-operation. President Donald Trump is but the most flamboyant among a gaggle of hyper-nationalists who argue that interdependence is an illusion conjured up by intellectuals to destroy state sovereignty and rob people of their identities. This thesis is nonsense but it can be useful politics. Rather than restrain tribal passions, these opportunists exploit the fears of their followers to amplify their own power. The world is paying a high price for these authoritarian excesses. It is not a coincidence that the pandemic started in a country where the government does not trust its people, suppresses the free flow of information and prevents its officials—including health professionals—from speaking the truth. It is also not a coincidence that many of the countries that have dealt effectively with the virus are strong democracies—including Germany, Iceland, New Zealand, Norway, Taiwan and Finland (all headed, as it happens, by women). These and other examples show that the free flow of information, fact-based debate about policy options, the voluntary self-organisation of civil society and open engagement between government and the people are vital assets in combating the pandemic. To be sure, in a public-health emergency we need governments to act decisively to protect the common good. It is not anti-democratic to close schools and restaurants, limit the size of gatherings, regulate travel, mandate the production of medical equipment and the like. There is, however, a clear distinction between using power and abusing it. Hungary’s prime minister, for example, has embraced the crisis to bypass parliament and restrict the press. If left unchecked, such practices will cripple democracy around the world. This would be all-too reminiscent of the early 1930s, when the Great Depression undermined faith in conventional governments, and nationalist fervour led to the murder of millions. Democracies and small “d’ democrats in every society must wake up to this threat. We must strongly affirm the lasting validity of hard-won rights and political freedoms. We must expose efforts to use the current emergency as an excuse to inflict permanent damage on democratic institutions. Further, we must work together to achieve what no country can accomplish on its own—victory over the virus. One of the great perils posed by authoritarian leaders is that they seek legitimacy by claiming a monopoly on the skills and muscle required to defend their homelands. This makes them less likely than democratic counterparts to admit, let alone emphasise, the value of co-operating with others. Instead, they treat appeals for international comity as signs of weakness or betrayal. But the pandemic has reminded us that the modern world demands strong leadership at every level. To succeed against the virus and other threats that do not respect international borders, democratic states must help revive a basic international understanding: by working creatively with others, every country can reap benefits. This is not to say, of course, that democracy provides a guarantee of enlightened leadership. In America, the pandemic has further exposed already-glaring shortcomings in the credibility and capabilities of the present occupant of the White House. But the greatest virtue of democracy is its resilience, and ability to correct itself. America’s November elections are less than six months away. When properly led, America can still do more than any other country to move the world in the right direction. An America that has recovered its true voice can help people everywhere to oppose the unconstrained power grabs of authoritarians and would-be dictators. It can work closely with democratic allies to support those struggling to maintain their rights, their voices and their dignity. It can make science and reason, not national one-upmanship, once again the basis for global decision-making. It can, in short, go a long way towards restoring our collective faith in the future. At the Geneva Summit in 1985, where Ronald Reagan and Mikhail Gorbachev met for the first time, the American president asked the Soviet leader a question that had been weighing on him. “Would you help us,” he asked, “if the United States were suddenly attacked from outer space?” Gorbachev responded without hesitation. “No doubt,” he said. “We too,” replied Reagan. The dialogue and solidarity among adversaries then, faced with a “Day the Earth Stood Still”-type question, is a useful reminder to us now. And once the covid crisis subsides, nations will see other dangers that call out for international collaboration, from climate change to terrorism. Like Reagan, they will ask of one another: “Would you help us?” The answer will show whether we have learned nothing from the current crisis or—as I would prefer to believe—reawakened to the logic that, by standing together, we can resume progress towards a more peaceful, more prosperous and safer world. ______________ Madeleine Albright was the US Secretary of State from 1997 to 2001. Her books on politics include “Fascism: A Warning” (HarperCollins, 2018) and “Hell and Other Destinations: A 21st-Century Memoir” (HarperCollins, 2020).