The scale of the economic disaster facing the world is still incalculable. One striking gauge is the giddy climb of America’s unemployment rate, to an 80-year high. Like other countries, America has erected a safety-net of unprecedented generosity, but millions of people have not had their money. The unemployment-insurance system has struggled to cope with a staggering 36.5m claims for support. The crisis has even hit the perennially upbeat entrepreneurs of Silicon Valley. Although still well below the national average and the peak during the financial crisis of 2007-09, the unemployment rate in the region is edging up. As joblessness climbs in America, corporate bankruptcies surge. In recent weeks well-known firms—ranging from Neiman Marcus, a department-store chain, and J. Crew, a clothing retailer, to Gold’s Gym, a glitzy workout group—have gone bust. As the American economy sinks further in the coming months, many more firms are sure to get into trouble. A wave of bankruptcies will surely hit Europe, too. One early indicator of the sectors in trouble in America is the distressed-debt ratio—the share of junk bonds with spreads of more than ten percentage points above US Treasuries. Even before the pandemic, globalisation was in trouble. The open system of trade that had dominated the world economy had been dented by the financial crash and the Sino-American trade war. America, for example, had already markedly cut back the share of its imports that comes from China. And as businesses regroup after the present crisis, they will be further adjusting their supply chains, accelerating a trend towards regionalisation. The WTO reckons that because of the virus trade could fall by as much as a third. Businesses so far have shown impressive resilience. But there is a limit to how much they can prepare for awful surprises. They could take lessons from the small Chinese town that makes half of Japan’s coffins, and illustrates a surprisingly resilient hyper-localised version of globalisation. Around the world, national lockdowns are easing—tentatively and nervously. France’s déconfinement, its emergence from strict, legally enforced rules, has been hampered by adversarial labour relations and distrust of the government. Britain’s handling of the easing of the lockdown was widely criticised as confused. Sweden, which shunned a hard lockdown, seems to suffer a death-rate from covid-19 much higher than its neighbours’. But it may yet turn out, a year from now, to have fared no worse. Countries such as South Korea that seemed to have defeated the virus, face renewed clusters of infection. Some countries that have contained the virus more successfully than others might consider joining up in travel “bubbles”. As some countries pass their peaks of covid-19 infections, others are still to reach theirs. Africa, with about 17% of the world’s population, has less than 2% of its confirmed cases of covid-19—69,947 cases and 2,419 deaths by May 13th. But Africa has tested just over 1m people for the virus, and the true number of infections is likely to be much higher. Some of the continent’s autocrats have seen an upside in the pandemic: it deters election monitors, as happened in March in Guinea, and will again in Burundi on May 20th; or it can provide a pretext not to have an election at all, an option Uganda’s president, Yoweri Museveni, seems to favour over a vote due next year.