AMERICA’S PRO-LIFE activists could scarcely believe their luck when Norma McCorvey (pictured, left) changed her mind about abortion in 1995. For two decades the “Jane Roe” plaintiff in Roe v Wade, the Supreme Court ruling that in 1973 made abortion a constitutional right, had been a heroine to pro-choice activists. Overnight, she became one to anti-abortionists. In a documentary filmed shortly before her death from heart failure in 2017, McCorvey made an extraordinary revelation: her support of the anti-abortion movement had been an act. “I took their money and they put me out in front of the camera and told me what to say, and that’s what I’d say,” she claims in “AKA Jane Roe”. Weaving archival footage with more recent commentary from McCorvey and the activists who worked with her, the documentary is a fascinating look at the effects of Roe on the woman who instigated it. At times, the film verges on the voyeuristic: it begins with several (unnecessary) seconds of McCorvey struggling for breath before she declares: “this is my deathbed confession”. But it mostly succeeds in conveying the complexity of its subject in a way that is respectful. Though the director, Nick Sweeney, is occasionally heard asking a question, there is no overarching narration—a fitting treatment of a woman whose story has been commandeered by so many for their own purposes. In 1969 lawyers saw McCorvey as the perfect plaintiff for a case to legalise abortion. Pregnant with her third child at the age of 22 she was desperate and, crucially, poor, meaning she could not afford to travel from her home state of Texas to one where abortion was legal. McCorvey served her purpose but Roe came too late for her: by the time the justices ruled, the “Roe baby”, as she refers to it in the film, was two years old (and, like her other children, had been adopted). For several years after Roe, McCorvey lived quietly with her girlfriend, Connie Gonzales. But in the mid-1980s, as America’s anti-abortion movement became increasingly violent, she aligned herself with the pro-choice cause, giving speeches at rallies and working in an abortion clinic. In the early 1990s Operation Rescue, one of the noisiest anti-abortion groups of the era, moved its headquarters into the building next door to the clinic. Flip Benham, an evangelical minister who was then its head, befriended McCorvey. In 1995 he baptised her on national TV and Operation Rescue got a new recruit. The drama of this moment is apparent in footage of a church service McCorvey attended soon afterwards: standing at the lectern she repeatedly apologises for “leading innocent children to a senseless and terrible death”. Even with her testimony, it is not entirely clear why McCorvey changed her position. Her claim that she was paid to do so by pro-life activists appears to be corroborated in the film by Robert Schenck, one of the evangelical ministers involved with Operation Rescue. But he, like others, hints at other causes behind her about-turn. It is a measure of the ugly polarisation over abortion in America that in the years following Roe, McCorvey was simultaneously hailed as a freedom fighter and villainised as a sinner who had sent innumerable babies to their death. The latter must have been particularly hard to bear. Charlotte Taft, an abortion-rights activist featured in the film, says that the pro-life movement seemed to answer to McCorvey’s yearning to be “good”. She also suggests that McCorvey felt she was not properly respected by pro-choice activists. (They had become suspicious of her after she admitted her third pregnancy had not, as she had originally claimed, been caused by rape.) Perhaps McCorvey should not have been used as a figurehead for either position. Her vulnerability was obvious to the ministers who exploited her, as Mr Schenck admits; it is hard not to feel that she would have been better off keeping a low profile after Roe. As a plain-talking 69-year-old there is not a whiff of the activist’s zeal about her. “If a young woman wants to have an abortion, fine, you know, it’s no skin off my ass”, she says at one point. One of the documentary’s most heartrending revelations is how she was forced to renounce Gonzales, her devoted girlfriend. In the footage of McCorvey’s baptism, Gonzales, surrounded by whooping pro-lifers, looks serious and sad. “When Miss Norma got to know Jesus, there was going to be some lifestyle changes,” says Mr Benham, grinning, as if the thought amuses him. Gonzales died in 2015. “I loved her with all my heart,” McCorvey says. It perhaps came as no great surprise to people who knew McCorvey that her pro-life activism was not quite what it had seemed. Nonetheless, the documentary’s most dramatic moment is when Ms Taft, the pro-choice activist, and Mr Schenck, the minister, watch the clip of her confession. They both look deeply shaken by it. “That just really hurts because it’s big stakes,” says Ms Taft, appearing close to tears. “It’s just really big stakes.” Mr Schenck is also visibly distressed. Having campaigned against abortion for decades, last year he wrote an op-ed in the New York Times saying he felt he could no longer tell women what they should do with an unwanted pregnancy. “I knew what we were doing, and there were times I was sure she knew, and I wondered, ‘Is she playing us?’”, he says. “What I didn’t have the guts to say was, ‘Because I know damn well we’re playing her.’” “AKA Jane Roe” is available on Hulu now