WITH AMERICA now past the grim milestone of 100,000 deaths from covid-19, comparisons are inevitably being drawn between the way different parts of the world have handled the pandemic. In fact the official death rate in America is about the same as in the European Union. The erratic performance of President Donald Trump has mattered less than most Americans think. But location data from mobile phones show that Europeans have submitted themselves to tighter lockdown restrictions than Americans have. And, in America, Republicans have been less likely to adhere to social-distancing orders than Democrats, even when living in places with similar levels of infection. America, unlike Europe, is in some places reopening the economy without indications that the rate of infection has been falling. It may have more sad milestones to pass. America’s economic response to the virus, however, may turn out better than Europe’s. Eastern Europe’s economies are especially vulnerable and may face a recession as bad as the one that followed the collapse of communism. Breaking the habit of a generation, China’s parliament, the National People’s Congress (NPC), this week failed to set an annual target for GDP growth. Economists abroad applauded: the target has led to much wasteful investment and book-cooking. The pandemic has rendered a target meaningless. It has also prompted a debate about how to finance the increased budget deficit China will need. Inflation hawks have been warning against moves by the People’s Bank of China to buy government bonds directly. Worldwide, the pandemic has wreaked havoc with economic data: rarely, for example, have GDP numbers been as uncertain. So statisticians are trying to compensate, partly by incorporating more “real-time” data, from restaurant reservations to prices on Amazon. The NPC session drew less attention for economic-policy shocks than for unprecedented steps to crush dissent in Hong Kong. Its decision to impose a national-security law there should frighten the rest of the world, too. Not for the first time, many are declaring “the end of Hong Kong”, as a place with its own values and guarantees of basic rights. But business in the territory has been muted about the proposed law. Mainland firms, fast becoming the backbone of Hong Kong’s economy, will grin and bear it. And China is in no mood for magnanimity. Its diplomats are stoking nationalism at home, and playing the obnoxious bully on the world stage. During the pandemic, international travel has all but stopped. Some countries, such as India, ended all road and rail transport, grounded all flights and shuttered airports. By the tourism industry’s reckoning, 330m jobs depend on travellers. Yet, even as countries ease lockdowns, 2020 will be for a lot of people a year without holidays. Many will not be able to afford them. Those that can may find they cannot travel to their chosen destination. China is leading the world out of travel lockdowns, but still largely within its own borders. Whether—and how fast—the Chinese rediscover their yen for venturing abroad matters to the rest of the world. Once a tourism tiddler, China now sends more visitors overseas than any other country. The spread of mobile money in east Africa hinges on crises. Violence in Kenya in 2008 made people afraid to go out. They started sending money to each other by phone using a newfangled service called M-Pesa, which is now the most celebrated mobile-money service in the world and much imitated. Covid-19 might have a similar catalytic effect in other countries. In Rwanda, for example, the number of mobile-money transfers reportedly doubled in the week after a lockdown was imposed in March. By late April users were making 3m transactions a week, five times the pre-pandemic norm. Mobile money also makes it easier to use other financial services—such as microfinance loans—in a time of pandemic.