IN RECENT WEEKS as many as 3.9bn people—half of the world’s population—have been living under lockdown due to the coronavirus pandemic. Many have sought to recreate what is lost. Unable to meet in person, friends and families gather on Zoom for digital approximations of after-work drinks, birthday parties and even funerals. Hopeful romantics set up online dates. Live webcams allow schoolchildren to take ersatz field trips to zoos and famous geographical sites. Many museums and art galleries—including the British Museum in London, the Museé d’Orsay in Paris and the Uffizi Gallery in Florence—have launched virtual tours of their buildings and exhibits. Such simulacra are rarely as satisfying as the real thing. But one initiative, from the Getty Museum in California, has allowed people to engage with art in an especially creative way. The museum, whose collection of art and antiquities is one of the largest in the world, asked people to recreate their favourite artwork using items in their homes and to post the results on social media. The idea was not a wholly original one: the Rijksmuseum in Amsterdam had already issued a challenge from an Instagram account called “Tussen Kunst en Quarantaine” (“Between Art and Quarantine”). But while the Rijksmuseum encouraged home-made versions of any art, the Getty prod participants to riff on pieces in its collection, a great number of which are available to view and download online. The response was enormous. It is difficult to track just how many entries have been posted to Twitter, Facebook and Instagram, but the number of people accessing artworks in the Getty’s online collection has risen by 306% since the museum launched the initiative on March 29th. Traffic to the Getty’s blog, “The Iris”, which discusses the art and its creators, is up 550%. The results are often highly creative and amusing. A quick scroll through the #GettyMuseumChallenge hashtag on Twitter reveals shots of Vincent Van Gogh’s “Irises”, remade with carrots and Play-Doh (pictured), and of the Master of Cecilia’s “Madonna and Child”—with a French bulldog filling in for Jesus. Many of those participating in the challenge see it as an opportunity to produce an imitation of their favourite artwork regardless of whether it is in the Getty or not. Art-lovers can also peruse images of dogs wrapped in turbans to emulate Johannes Vermeer’s “Girl with a Pearl Earring” (which is in the Hague) and a focaccia rendering of Edvard Munch’s “The Scream” (which is in Norway’s National Museum in Oslo). The interactive nature of recreating an artwork can lead to deeper insights than merely looking. In 1793, when the Louvre in Paris first opened its doors, it was decided that any artist wishing to try and replicate the museum’s masterpieces would be provided with an easel and allowed to do so. This began a long tradition of “copyists”, under which the Louvre grants 250 permits annually to artists from a variety of backgrounds. The copyists—who over the years have included such famous names as Paul Cézanne, Edgar Degas and Salvador Dalí—can paint for three months and take their creations home (though they have to adhere to strict guidelines to prevent them being resold as forgeries). Asked why she did it, one amateur artist told CNN: “You spend so much much time in front of this painting, that little by little you understand what’s in it—how [the painter] did it, the people in it, the historical context”. For some participants, the Getty Museum’s challenge is just a bit of fun; for others it is a chance to educate themselves and others. Teachers have set the challenge as homework, using it as a launchpad to discuss composition and aesthetic choices with their students. Peter Brathwaite, a British opera singer, has recreated more than 20 paintings on Twitter. Browsing artwork online, Mr Brathwaite found himself drawn to images relating to his Caribbean heritage; he sees recreating these works as an opportunity to draw attention to paintings with black subjects. “I quickly realised that people aren’t really aware of lots of this art,” he says. “I wasn’t aware of lots of it.” After painstakingly arranging each picture, Mr Brathwaite does some research into its subject and origins; he posts this material in the accompanying caption. This has led, he says, to online discussions about art and the representation that may not otherwise have occurred. It has also deepened his own appreciation of the artworks themselves. “I’m actually dissecting and analysing the art more deeply than I probably would have in a gallery,” he says. Picture credit: “Irises“ (1889), Vincent Van Gogh. The J. Paul Getty Museum. Re-creation via Twitter by Cara Jo O’Connell and family using Play-Doh, carrot slices and wooden beads