EVERY FRIDAY, The Economist’s editors and correspondents bring you a global view on democracy in America. Each episode draws on the rigour and expertise of our network of journalists across the US and around the world. Going beyond the horse race, they examine the social and economic forces that are shaping politics and assess President Donald Trump’s record, the challenge from his Democratic opponents and how America's international role is changing. In this week's episode, a row over the president’s tax returns has arrived in the Supreme Court. Donald Trump is challenging subpoenas that seek to disclose his finances. The court’s power over the presidency is being tested while the justices face the frustrations of remote working. How might the Supreme Court affect the election? John Prideaux, The Economist’s US editor, hosts with Charlotte Howard, New York bureau chief, and Washington correspondent Jon Fasman. Steven Mazie, the Economist’s Supreme Court correspondent, and legal historian Mary Ziegler also join.  Listen on: Apple Podcasts | Spotify | Google | Stitcher | TuneIn Amid the lockdown some American students have filed lawsuits to get refunds on their tuition fees. Shifting classes online has rekindled concerns about the high cost of college education. Last year an FBI investigation exposed wealthy parents paying to cheat elite university admissions. The perception that university is no longer a driver of social mobility—but the opposite—fuels the political divide. How true is that? In last week’s episode of “Checks and Balance”: US policy correspondent Idrees Kahloon reports on a scheme that helps poor students complete college and we unpick the complicated history of American meritocracy and hear from the frontline of the admissions process.  Listen on: Apple Podcasts | Spotify | Google | Stitcher | TuneIn The coronavirus pandemic has been grim for admirers of America's preeminence. The country that rallied allies to defend democracy and lead the world in scientific endeavour has been hit hardest by the coronavirus. China has sent medical supplies to American states, while the president brainstorms unlikely cures on live TV. Is America ceding global leadership? Maybe. One certainty is that fretting over the demise of the Republic is a longstanding American tradition. We traced the origins of declinism in modern American politics and heard from someone who spent years preparing for societal breakdown, only for those plans themselves to unravel. Listen below.  Listen on: Apple Podcasts | Spotify | Google | Stitcher | TuneIn “We can corral the coronavirus," Gov. Greg Abbott said, announcing his plan to reopen the Texas economy. Floridians have returned to the beaches and other Southern states are starting to relax restrictions on restaurants, gyms and hair salons. But public support for maintaining the lockdown remains strong. Can America reopen while keeping covid-19 at bay? In this episode, we hear how Wisconsinites view the lockdown and a Bronx medic tells us what it’s like on the frontline. We also found out where ending social distancing might be most risky.  Listen on: Apple Podcasts | Spotify | Google | Stitcher | TuneIn To dig deeper: And for full access to The Economist’s print, digital and audio editions subscribe: www.economist.com/pod2020.