FROM THE house where she was born, Fusun Onur works with space, place and time. She lives in a yali, a type of waterfront building unique to Istanbul, which sits on the banks of the Bosporus. For Ms Onur, who still shares this family heirloom with her sister, the house has always been a studio. The things it contains in abundance—objects, light, shadows, sounds—are the stuff of her art. She sometimes discards artworks she doesn’t like by tossing them into the water. Ms Onur graduated from the Academy of Fine Arts in Istanbul in 1960, where she had studied sculpture under Ali Hadi Bara, one of modern Turkey’s pre-eminent sculptors. She won a Fulbright scholarship and did a masters degree at the Maryland Institute College of Art, where she developed an interest in philosophy and art theory. It was in America that she first experimented with modernist abstraction, leaving behind the figurative busts of her student days. “I first think of the place a sculpture will be situated; the space it will occupy; where light hits it and the shadow it will cast,” she says. “I go from there.” When Ms Onur began exhibiting her work in Istanbul in the 1970s, the city’s art scene had not seen anything quite like it. She only used black ink for a series of 12 drawings, “Dividing Space on a White Piece of Paper” (1965-66), but created the impression of depth and volume. These abstract drawings hinted at where Ms Onur would go next: using everyday objects such as tables, chairs, mirrors, photographs, lace, string and personal items of clothing, she set about challenging the idea of sculpture itself. “From traditional academic training, Ms Onur developed an unusual visual language and practice for its time,” says Bige Orer, the director of the Istanbul Biennial, a contemporary-art exhibition. “She questioned the passive experience of looking at sculpture and its distance from the observer.” For Ms Orer, these works anticipated installation art, which would only later become a popular art form. Usually mixed-media constructions that transform a viewer’s experience of a space, such large-scale pieces had not been attempted in Turkey. “This had its difficulties, both in terms of finding the materials I needed, and in terms of audiences understanding the works themselves,” Ms Onur recalls. “But I find that people with no art training, who approach my artwork without assumptions and simply respond to them through emotion, understand them just fine.” Her enigmatic art quickly drew attention both at home and abroad. She participated in the first Biennale Internationale des Jeunes Artistes in Paris in 1971, and her work was regularly exhibited in Turkey in the 1980s and 1990s, including at the inaugural Istanbul Biennale in 1987. Her art from this period turns inwards, focusing on childhood, domestic life and memory. A sculpture called “Dream of Old Furniture” (1985) uses antiques and textiles to recreate a mid-century living room, but one that is abandoned and decaying. “July” (1983) is a bare canvas onto which the artist has sewn what looks like a string-mop head that evokes a young girl’s ponytail. “From An Exhibition” (1989) is an empty picture frame with bits of wallpaper stuck to the outer edges, as if it has been torn out of someone’s home. If there is a common thread in Ms Onur’s art, it is an interest in the nature and boundaries of representation. Her work from the 2000s, in particular, fixates on this theme. “Pegged” (2014) features rectangular wire frames attached to the wall with clothes pegs: when light hits the wires it creates a second line in shadow. “Mirrored Labyrinth” (2014) is a plexiglass mirror construction that disorients the visitor’s sense of depth and space when they walk inside. “At times, if the idea calls for it, I resort to materials I don’t particularly like. The work I want to produce determines the medium I use, not the other way round,” Ms Onur explains. Although there is a more personal touch to her sculptures of domestic objects, these recent works seem to come full circle: their minimalism and abstraction recall her early ink-on-paper experiments. Emre Baykal, who curated a major retrospective of Ms Onur’s work at the Arter gallery in Istanbul in 2014, reckons the artist has a “desire to transgress the boundary between painting and sculpture”. At 82 years old, Ms Onur is unfazed about her next major project—creating the Turkey pavilion at the next Venice Biennale, now postponed from 2021 to 2022—because “there’s no difference between preparing an international or a domestic exhibition”. Ideas have never been a problem for her, and they can spring from anything and everywhere. “I never know what could become a source of inspiration,” she says. But “when I have an idea, I grow restless to create it.”