MANY MUSICIANS hone their craft in their bedrooms or in the garage of their family home; Ike White started his musical career while serving a life sentence for murder. Record executives, thinking they’d found the next Jimi Hendrix, persuaded prison authorities to allow them to produce an album with him inside. “Changin’ Times”, released in 1976, met with acclaim and adulation—including from Stevie Wonder, who helped his fellow musician find a new lawyer. Released from prison after his sentence was overturned in 1978, White seemed poised for stardom. Instead, he disappeared and his first and only album faded into obscurity. In 2014 Dan Vernon, a British film-maker, travelled to America to find out what happened. “The Changin’ Times of Ike White” starts as a conventional music documentary, with archive footage and nostalgic interviewees, who speak of White’s easy confidence and charm. Focusing on the period White spent in prison and the making of his album, contemporaries, industry figures and old friends all speak of his star potential. White’s charisma and dramatic backstory were undoubtedly part of his appeal to record producers, but he had talent, too, and his music could have found an audience alongside the era’s celebrated soul and funk acts, such as Roy Ayers and Sly and the Family Stone. Like those artists, White’s album was joyful; his record stands out for its musicianship and, on the title track in particular, the memorable melodies. It boasts polished arrangements, with backing vocals, lush strings and vibrant horns, showing no sign that it was recorded in a high-security prison. Jerry Goldstein, the producer responsible for “Changin’ Times”, ruefully recalls how White didn’t make the most of circumstances that had aligned in his favour. “He was right in the pocket of that time,” Mr Goldstein says. Here the film jumps forward 40 years to the present day, as Mr Vernon finds White leading a quiet life on the Californian coast. Living with a new wife and manager, Lana, under the moniker of David Maestro, he has sought to draw a line under his past, and seems to have found a new sense of peace in his domesticated set-up. “I’m no longer Ike White, I’m David Maestro,” he says. “It’s a new birth.” The film chronicles the pair’s life together, and White tells the story of his early years: his family’s musical background; his father’s fatal heart attack onstage in a Chicago jazz club; his experiences of the civil-rights movement and police harassment. He speaks, too, of his work as a getaway driver, a robbery gone wrong and the death that resulted in his prison sentence. The narrative returns to the years between his release from prison and now. This section is complicated by a tragic turn of events: after giving his initial interviews and opening up his archive of photos and home videos to the film-makers, White took his own life. The film then follows Lana as she speaks to White’s past acquaintances and sifts through his personal records. He had made many attempts to reignite his musical career, as a home-made video advertising his services as an entertainer and a move to Las Vegas—to start a dance and music ensemble—attest. It is clear that he was restlessly creative. In her investigations, Lana uncovers more sides to White. His previous partners describe him as an unguarded, warmly affectionate person but, as they tell it, there were often other women, and some report inconsistencies in what they were told about his past. While there are videos showing White taking one of his sons to school, his daughter from another relationship speaks of the hurt she experienced after he failed to maintain a relationship with her. Elsewhere, there’s a DIY music video with an elderly woman who—in circumstances that are never fully explained—he adopted as a mother figure and lived with for several years. “The Changin’ Times of Ike White” is compelling both as a counterfactual music history—showcasing a career that could have been—and as an insight into one man’s real, extraordinary life. The circumstances of White’s death raise difficult questions over the effect the documentary had on him: he speaks earnestly about wanting to tell his story but he was clearly conflicted about his past. People lead contradictory lives; this film shows how difficult the parts can be to reconcile. “The Changin’ Times of Ike White” will be broadcast on BBC Four on May 18th