HE IS A drug addict and a petty thief; she is a struggling artist. He knows nothing about art but one day, in a delirious state, he and a friend break into the gallery where her work is displayed and steal two of her best paintings. After the thief is arrested, the artist becomes fascinated with him and proposes that he sit for her. The thief agrees, and a friendship is born. It seems the stuff of bad fiction, but the story is drawn from real life: surveillance footage from the Galleri Nobel in Oslo on April 20th 2015 forms the opening scenes of “The Painter and the Thief”, a new documentary. Benjamin Ree chronicles the relationship between Barbora Kysilkova, a Czech naturalist painter living in the city, and Karl-Bertil Nordland, the perpetrator of the crime. It is a riveting tale that asks serious questions about the nature of art without being too heavy-handed. Ms Kysilkova initiates contact with Mr Nordland at his arraignment (the film does not make clear the outcome of the hearing). Later, when he is sitting for her in her studio, she tries to put him at ease by asking about his life. At first, she seems to have an ulterior motive—to get him to reveal the location of her paintings, which he claims to have no memory of—but over time she seems to be enjoying a deeper reward. Here is someone who loved her work so much he was willing, in his addled state, to risk incarceration to have it. It is a validation of her talents that the art world has not yet offered. As someone whose life has spun off-course, Mr Nordland also needs validation. He finds it in Ms Kysilkova’s art: he is stunned by her portrait of him, which seems to truly capture his character. They embrace, and from then on the film shows them as bound together. Their troubles, however, increase. Mr Nordland’s addiction results in physical injury, and Ms Kysilkova’s unusual obsession with Mr Nordland comes at the expense of her other relationships, particularly her marriage. Mr Ree’s thesis is that they have more in common than the viewer could at first imagine; this is clear when Ms Kysilkova off-handedly refers to herself as a “painting junkie”. The film is sharply edited, with Mr Rees shifting focus from Ms Kysilkova to Mr Nordland and back again, sometimes showing the same events from different angles. It is not a comment on the nature of subjectivity, as in “Rashomon”, a landmark film by Akira Kurosawa that showed a vicious assault from various points of view. Rather it is a demonstration of how people tell stories about themselves and others to make sense of their lives and, in some cases, justify their dysfunctions. In one key scene, Mr Ree has Ms Kysilkova tell the story of Mr Nordland’s troubled childhood and how he landed in a life of crime. It’s an ingenious choice, revealing more about Ms Kysilkova than about Mr Nordland, as she describes her muse as a damaged soul in need of saving. Many movies about the relationship between an artist and their muse, such as “Shakespeare in Love” or “The Muse”, treat it with a light touch. Even “Portrait of a Lady on Fire”, for all its virtues, fails to probe the theme too deeply, instead wrapping its story of a painter and her subject in a larger tale of romantic love and women’s liberation. “The Painter and the Thief” is much more incisive. For Ms Kysilkova and Mr Nordland, the relationship becomes all-consuming. Instead of asking whether their art was worth the personal cost, as many biopics of artists do, “The Painter and the Thief” simply charts the thin line between inspiration and dysfunction, and between art and the world outside the frame. “The Painter and the Thief” is released online by Neon on May 22nd