IT WAS AN extraordinary period of success for Hal Ashby. Already an Oscar-winning editor, in the 1970s he turned to directing just as his own socially conscious ideals came into temporary alignment with studios looking to capitalise on the popularity of “counterculture” films such as “Bonnie and Clyde” (1967) and “Easy Rider” (1969). The film-maker released a remarkable run of movies that decade, beginning with “The Landlord” in 1970 and concluding in 1979 with “Being There”. In between came “Harold and Maude” (1971), “The Last Detail” (1973), “Shampoo” (1975) and “Coming Home” (1978). It is “The Landlord”, released 50 years ago on May 20th, that is the most overlooked of these films. It does not boast the star power that Warren Beatty, Jack Nicholson, Jane Fonda and Peter Sellers would later bestow on Ashby’s work. Though United Artists, the distributor, tried to sell it as a raunchy comedy—with a tagline of “watch the landlord get his”—the film proved too raw for audiences, who stayed away. But it is a poignant (and often funny) critique of gentrification, produced less than a decade after the term was coined. Beau Bridges (pictured) plays Elgar Enders, a young man of wealth who purchases a building in a mostly black neighbourhood in New York with an eye to evicting the tenants and renovating it. The first part of the film is framed almost as a fish-out-of-water comedy. The hapless Elgar clashes with the building’s inhabitants, including a cigarette-smoking child, a professor and a shotgun-toting palm reader, and befriends Francie Johnson (Diana Sands), a hairdresser, much to the chagrin of Copee (Louis Gossett Jr), her husband, a civil-rights activist. This small community contrasts with Elgar’s bigoted family, who live in palatial splendour with liveried black servants. As the film goes on, Elgar grows closer to the tenants even as he plots their eviction. He embarks on a relationship with Lanie (Marki Bey), a dancer, and has a drunken tryst with Francie, which results in an unwanted pregnancy. Edgar has little intention of taking responsibility for any hurt feelings or difficulties. When confronted by Lanie about his infidelity, his explanation is simple: “Because I’m a bastard.” In the end, Edgar grows up, acknowledging his child and committing to Lanie. His eviction plans are set aside. Bill Gunn, the film’s screenwriter and a director in his own right, skilfully adapted Kristin Hunter’s novel of 1966. Hunter’s book, written in the first person, followed Elgar throughout; but in the second half of the film, Gunn allows the voices of the tenants to dominate. As well as racism, the movie explores colourism, or prejudice against people within a racial group on the basis of skin tone. Francie boasts she was once crowned “Miss Sepia, 1957”, but now her husband tells her he wishes she was more black. During a tenants’ party, the sound drops out and the guests talk straight to camera about their experience of being black. Like much of the film, the scene is refreshingly forthright and direct. The story has only become more relevant in the intervening years. “The Landlord” was filmed in Park Slope in Brooklyn, at the time a rundown neighbourhood following the so-called “white flight” of the 1950s and 1960s. Today it is one of the wealthiest areas in New York, boasting celebrity residents. A three-bedroom apartment with a garden might be listed for as much as $2.9m. The film is also a reminder of the early promise of Ashby’s work. “The Landlord” showcases his vision as a film-maker, and his ability to depict the humanity of both victims and tormentors. That promise ended with the 1970s. In the 1980s the increasingly corporate studio system, which focused on making blockbusters of the kind created by Steven Spielberg and George Lucas, did not care much for Ashby’s style. Drug-addiction and health problems—combined with the waning influence of the counterculture that he had so brilliantly chronicled—sent Ashby’s personal life and his career into further decline, and he died in 1988, aged 59. In 1968, when accepting the Film Editing Oscar for “In the Heat of the Night”, he hoped that “all our talents and creativity” could be put “towards peace and love”. The streak of films he was about to embark on, starting with “The Landlord”, proved him true to his word.