Editor’s note: Some of our covid-19 coverage is free for readers of The Economist Today, our daily newsletter. For more stories and our pandemic tracker, see our hub THE COVID-19 pandemic has triggered a surge of interest in basic income as a way of compensating people for the economic hardships imposed by lockdowns. As a modest, regular, equal payment to all individuals, regardless of income or employment, basic income is fair, non-discriminatory and comprehensive—unlike the emergency safety-net schemes that governments have scrambled to put in place. However, some converts see basic income as a strictly temporary measure; a balm for momentary pain to be placed back in the medicine cabinet when normality returns. This grossly misunderstands both the nature of the crisis and the importance of basic income. The economic system will not, and cannot, bounce back unchanged. It was on an unsustainable course before the pandemic. The speed and scale with which lockdowns crushed people’s financial lives underscore that. As part of wider reforms to create a fairer, sounder global economy, basic income should become the anchor for a new income-distribution system. The past 40 years have seen a strengthening of “rentier capitalism,” under which value is increasingly extracted, not produced. This has generated a new global class structure with a politically powerful plutocracy alongside a burgeoning “precariat”, living on the edge of unsustainable personal debt, reduced to being supplicants in the economic system. Yet in some ways, we have been there before: the era prior to the second world war and the welfare state. In an epoch-defining British government report in 1942, William Beveridge said it was “a time for revolutions, not for patching” what ailed the economy. The challenge was to slay what he called “five giants” that held back people and society itself: Disease, Idleness, Ignorance, Squalor and Want. The report set the agenda for post-war welfare states. By analogy, today’s version of capitalism has generated eight modern giants that block a sustainable market-based economy: Inequality, Insecurity, Debt, Stress, Precarity, Automation, Extinction and Populism. These modern giants became more pronounced under the austerity measures imposed after the financial crisis in 2008. For example, the cuts had the effect of starving the health-care systems—with the tragic consequences we see today. The global lockdown has created a huge fall in demand, but the more systemic giant staring down on us is debt. In the Spanish flu of 1918-20, perhaps 50m people died, but there was no slump. America, the leading economy, was in good shape for a rebound as Europe rebuilt after the war. At the time, America’s gross private, non-corporate debt was around half of gross domestic product (GDP) and corporate debt was lower still. By contrast, even before covid-19, private debt in America was 150% of GDP, while corporate debt hit a record 75%. In developing countries, total debt is 170% of GDP. Add to that the new economic hardships when we gradually exit lockdowns, and it is likely that millions of people will be unable to pay off these debts, leading to bankruptcies, mass job losses and homelessness. That is why the response to the covid-19 crisis requires the same muscular response as Beveridge unleashed in the 1940s, which preserved a market economy rather than eroded it. It should not only comprise “rescue” measures, because it would be ludicrous to simply return to the situation before the novel coronavirus. Instead, countries need to institute bold policies to build resilience—for individuals and businesses—and to pave the way for a revival of society grounded on ethical and sustainable foundations. Basic income would help in these three ways. First, rescue. The panicky measures governments have deployed at vast fiscal cost, such as wage subsidies, exclude many people, notably the most vulnerable, and are a bureaucratic nightmare. They also serve to ossify the unsustainable pre-coronavirus economic structure and prop up zombie companies. By contrast, a basic income would go to everybody, without exception, eliminating the huge administrative costs of means tests and eligibility checks. It would facilitate the restructuring of the economy by encouraging workers to move jobs to where they are needed and let zombie firms go bust, since the redundant employees have a basic income to fall back on. The pandemic has highlighted the insecurity of gig-economy workers in the precariat, who cannot afford to stay at home or self-isolate, putting their own health and that of others at risk. In practice, despite gestures in their direction, they are largely excluded from emergency income-support measures. But they would be reached by a basic income system. Moreover, stress and insecurity generate domestic violence. This has increased dramatically in every country amid the lockdowns. Women who are financially dependent on their partners cannot easily escape from abusive relationships. A basic income of their own would help to change that. The pandemic slump has highlighted the fragility of an economy based on high private and corporate debt. Pilot projects and experiments in places as far apart as Madhya Pradesh, India, and Stockton, California, have shown that a basic income enables poor people to gain control over their debts, which will be crucial if the slump is not to result in widespread destitution and desperation. Next, resilience. Existing government measures are hand-to-mouth efforts that do little or nothing to strengthen resilience to current and future shocks. For that, people need some degree of security. Basic income has been shown to improve IQ and decision-making. It also alleviates economic uncertainty, today’s main form of insecurity. Individual resilience feeds into community resilience. If everyone has basic security, social tensions and crime can be expected to decline. A basic income also improves health, including mental health, as trials in Canada, India and elsewhere have shown. This contributes to future resilience and strengthens public health systems. Last, revival. The pandemic has shown definitively that an income distribution system that links income and benefits to jobs, or the search for jobs, is no longer fit for purpose. Jobs are hard to find, and may not pay enough to meet the cost of living. As unemployment rises after the covid crisis, and insecure, unstable jobs are the norm, the precariat will grow to include middle-class professionals, not just the young struggling under college debt or people doing anything to get by. In the economy of the future, a basic income will seem as normal as public roads in the 19th century or public libraries in the 20th. It will underpin a new income-distribution system that recognises our new economic reality. A basic income will reduce the excessive inequalities of wealth and living standards. It will strengthen the precariat’s bargaining power to boost wages. It will enable people to work in hitherto unpaid or chronically underpaid jobs that are extremely valuable, such as nursing, care and community work. And it is affordable. Governments could reallocate costly tax breaks and privileges that mostly benefit the affluent. They could introduce a sensible system of capital taxation. They are measures needed in their own right to which the pandemic has given impetus. Covid-19 has given us time to reflect on what sort of society we want for the future. It has clearly increased the desire for a kinder, fairer society and demonstrated the dangers of placing faith in populist and autocratic leaders who care more for power than people. It also shows the degree to which we’re all in the same storm together (albeit in vastly different boats…). Basic income is itself an expression that we are all of equal worth. A just society should aspire to nothing less. ___________ Guy Standing is an economist and the author of numerous books on capitalism and basic income, most recently "Battling Eight Giants: Basic Income Now" (Bloomsbury, 2020). He is a professorial research associate at SOAS University of London and previously worked for 30 years at the International Labour Organisation in Geneva.